Introduction
Compilation of the Root and Condensed Tantra
Homage to noble Mañjuśrī, composite of the knowledgeand wisdom of every buddha.
Manifestation of unchanging and ultimate great bliss in indivisible union with nonaspected wisdom,
arising from unchanging, immovable moon nectar stacked in the skies of the central channel,
a supreme form, a mighty indranīla mountain embraced by a few young clouds,
in empty-form aspect endowed with every attribute supreme, embraced by the wisdom consort Viśvamātā: to you I bow.
Not moving from realms of profound, unfathomable wisdom,
yet the untainted renown of your enlightened activity in bringing the fortunate to the paths of ripening 
and freedom dances before the ladies of the ten directions;
mighty conqueror, Losang Drakpa and your disciples, I bow my head to your lotus feet.
From the great clouds of their knowledge fall the rains of scripture and reasoning to nourish the harvest of happiness.
Pens of wisdom have drawn in clarity upon their minds precious pictures of the two types of knowledge.
By expounding the doctrine of the mighty dharma king, you hold aloft a banner of stainless renown;
sublime masters, kindness without parallel, remain forever upon the crown of my head.
Here I will write a little on the Outer, Inner, and Other, which make up the three main themes of the glorious Kālacakra.
There are four main outlines:
1.Introduction: How the Buddha taught the Kālacakra Root Tantra
2.The primordial mind and body: Principal themes of the highest yoga class of tantra
3.Explanations of the intentions of the highest yoga tantras
4.An exposition of the Outer, Inner, and Other:
The three themes of Kālacakra
The first has three outlines:
1.How the Buddha taught the Kālacakra Root Tantra
2.Compilation of the Tantra
3.How the Root Tantra and the Condensed Tantra were taught by the dharma kings and the Kalkī1 kings of Shambhala
How the Buddha taught the Kālacakra Root Tantra
Our teacher, Śākyamuni Buddha, actualized complete enlightenment in the noble country of India under the Bodhi tree in Bodhgaya and turned the wheels of dharma by teaching the perfections, particularly the perfection of wisdom, upon Vulture’s Peak.
He traveled to the great stupa of Dhānyakaṭaka near Śrīparvata in southern India. Inside the stupa he emanated the mighty dharmadhātu speech mandala below and the glorious constellation mandala above. In this perfect place, a place of great bliss, he sat upon a vajra lion throne in the great Vajradhatu mandala.
There this perfect teacher, the lion of the Śākya, entered the meditative concentration upon Kālacakra and became the master of the mandala.
Surrounding him was the perfect mandala entourage of buddhas,  bodhisattvas, wrathful protectors, gods, nāgas, and goddesses, as well as the entourage of the tantra requestor, King Sucandra, an emanation of Vajrapāṇi, who had traveled by miraculous powers from the kingdom of Shambhala.
By requesting the tantra an audience gathered, consisting of the ninety-six kings of the ninety-six lands of Shambhala, many bodhisattvas, and countless fortunate gods and asura.
There the perfect dharma of worldly and nonworldly initiations, followed by prophecies of enlightenment and the Twelve Thousand Kālacakra Root Tantra was taught.
Here “twelve thousand” refers to the number of verses.
In the Realms chapter of the Great Commentary, in the second summary it says:
“Twelve thousand” refers to a collection of 384,000 syllables, which comprise 12,000 thirty-two-syllable anuṣtubh verses, and this is the Twelve Thousand Tantra.2
As this quote explains, a verse in anuṣtubh meter consists of lines of eight syllables.
Although the tantra taught in the Dhānyakaṭaka stupa was the Kālacakra Root Tantra, it is the assertion of the Kālacakra and its commentaries that every highest yoga tantra was being taught.
The Later Kālacakra Tantra says:
By the teaching of the Twelve Thousand in the dharmadhātu of Dhānyakaṭaka, all tantras of the Buddha were taught.3 This can also be known from the Sūryaśrī’s Drops of Nectar:
In the great and regal stupa of Dhānyakaṭaka, the conquering Buddha, the lion of the Śākya, was supplicated by those who wished to hear various tantras. There on the full moon of the middle spring month, in the form of the primordial buddha, he emanated the dharmadhātu speech mandala and the glorious constellation mandala above.
There on that very day gods and others were initiated by the Buddha and taught extensively and in condensed form all the systems of secret mantra.4
But when did our teacher teach the Root Tantra, and what are the dates of the Buddha?
This should be explained in detail.
The words of the Root Tantra, “Six hundred years from this year” are explained by the Great Commentary in the ninth summary from the Realms chapter:
This is the year the Tathāgata taught the dharma. It was prophesized that six hundred years after that year the great Mañjuśrī Yaśas would surely appear in the land known as Shambhala, north of the Sīta River.5 Therefore, approximately six hundred years after the Buddha taught the Root Tantra, the Kalkī king Mañjuśrī Yaśas appeared.
The Great Commentary in the third summary from the Realms chapter says:
Mañjuśrī became King Yaśas and from the bodhisattva lion throne he taught the dharma for a hundred years.6
Therefore, adding the hundred years of Mañjuśrī Yaśas to the previous six hundred since the time of the Buddha totals seven hundred years.
The Great Commentary in the ninth summary from the Realms chapter states:
“Naga hundred years from then” means that “naga, or eight, hundred years from the time of Yaśas’s” passing, “definitely,” meaning without doubt, the dharma of the barbarians will enter the land of Makha.7 Adding the above seven hundred years to these eight hundred years between death of Mañjuśrī Yaśas and the coming of the barbarians totals one thousand five hundred years.
Adding fire, sky, and ocean8 years to the above makes 1,903 years.
Therefore, from the time of the Buddha teaching the Root Tantra, up to the end of the 221 years of astronomy,9 1,903 years elapsed.
The Condensed Tantra states, “The past years of prabhava10 and so forth are to be added.” The last of the 1,903 years, or the last year of the 221 years of astronomy, is established as the kṣaya Fire Tiger year.11 Dividing 1,903 by sixty and working backward from Fire Tiger year in sixty-year cycles leaves a partial cycle of forty-three years.
The first year of that forty-three, counting backward from the Fire Tiger year is the tāraṇa male Wood Monkey year. Therefore, that year is the first year of the 1,903, working backward from the last year  of the two 221 years of astronomy.
It is also the first year of the six hundred years mentioned in the prophecy, “After six hundred years Mañjuśrī Yaśas will appear.” Six hundred years is an approximation because between the teaching of the Root Tantra and the beginning of the six hundred years, King Sucandra compiled the Root Tantra and composed a commentary.
This would have involved one or two years. How many years exactly?
The Great Commentary, in the third summary, says:
With the ascertainment of the tathāgata, the twelve-thousand-verse king of tantras and the extensive commentary of sixty thousand verses were written down in the languages of Shambhala and other lands and were taught by King Sucandra to those who lived in the many towns of the ninety-six lands.
This teaching was heard and read by those with faith. They committed it to memory and taught it extensively to others.
In the second year of teaching of the tantra, in order to create the causes for powerful attainments in others, he displayed the mandalas and magical creations, then entered the saṃbhogakāya enjoyment body, source of the nirmāṇakāya emanated body.12 This quote explains that in the second year of his teaching the Root Tantra and the extensive commentary Sucandra passed away. This year counts as the year of his passing. Before that, compiling the Root Tantra, composing the sixty-thousand-verse Extensive Commentary, and so forth took two years. Therefore, from the time of Sucandra first teaching the Root Tantra and commentary until he passed away, three years must have elapsed.
In the “easy to understand” verses from the Realms chapter, it says:
In Kalāpa, of the land known as Shambhala, glorious king, for some days you were the lord of men, supreme among gods, before returning to your abode.13 “Some days” is often explained as meaning three years and three fortnights,14 and the phrase “some days” in this quote is no exception. The three years of Sucandra are not included in the six hundred years because in the Great Commentary, immediately after the words “he entered into the saṃbhogakāya enjoyment body, source of the nirmāṇakāya emanated body,” it says:
Then Sureśvara taught the tantra for a hundred years, as did Tejī, Somadatta,  Sureśvara, Viśvamūrti, and Sureśāna.15
Thus, the six kings each taught for a hundred years.
Therefore, the three years of Sucandra and the year the Buddha taught the Root Tantra account for four years not included in the six hundred, and so in the quote that states that Mañjuśrī Yaśas will appear six hundred years after the teaching of the Tantra, the six hundred years are an approximation. Therefore, the actual first year of the six hundred years mentioned in the prophecy of King Mañjuśrī Yaśas would be four years before Wood Monkey year.16 This is Iron Dragon year and in this year on the full moon of the Caitra month the Buddha taught the Root Tantra.
In the Gnosis chapter of the Great Commentary, in the Supreme Unchanging Gnosis summary, it says:
Six hundred years after I have passed away, in the land of Shambhala, from the womb of Vijayadevī of Śākya lineage, Mañjuśrī as Kalkī Mañjuśrī Yaśas, son of Sureśāna will appear.17 The passage also states that Mañjuśrī Yaśas will appear six hundred years after our teacher taught the Root Tantra.
Therefore, the Root Tantra was taught in the year of Buddha’s passing.18 This means that the vikrama Iron Dragon year was the year in which our teacher taught the Root Tantra and was also the year in which he passed away. From his birth our teacher stayed for eighty years and in his eighty-first year on the full moon of Vaiśākha, he passed away. His eightieth year was pramathi Earth Rabbit year and, counting backward from that year, the forty-sixth year is jaya Wood Horse year, and that is the year of our teacher’s enlightenment.
Using the same method, counting back from pramathi Earth Rabbit year, the eightieth year is rudra Iron Monkey year, which establishes it as the year of our teacher’s birth.
Moreover, in the Abhiniṣkramaṇasūtra it says:
The bodhisattva turned twenty-nine, left the palace, and for six years practiced austerity.
After that, it is known that he came to actualize the nectar of immortality.19 Counting forward from Iron Monkey year, the twenty-ninth year is sarvadhara male Earth Rat and that is the year of leaving the palace.
Six years on from that year is jaya Wood Horse year, and that year is the forty-sixth year counting back from pramathi Earth Rabbit year. Therefore, in the Vaiśākha of Wood Horse year, the last of the spring months, on the full moon, in the last period of the night, at the onset of dawn, close to the beating of the drum, he became a complete and perfect buddha.
The Lalitavistarasūtra says:
Monks, in that way, the bodhisattva in the third part of the night, as dawn approached, close to the time of the beating of the drum…20 In the first summary of the Initiation chapter from the Great Commentary it also explains that he became a buddha during Vaiśākha at the approach of dawn:
As dawn approached on the full moon of the vaiśākha month, the conqueror, the mighty one of the Śākya, became a complete buddha. He turned the wheels of dharma and taught the three vehicles.
Then in the twelfth month on the Caitra full moon in Śrī Dhānyakaṭaka…21 This Vaiśākha full moon corresponds perfectly to the Vaiśākha full moon of the jaya Wood Horse year, fifty years22 before the Water Sheep year, which is the year preceding the Wood Monkey year, the first year of the prophesied six hundred years, because of the following reasons.
On the basis of the karaṇa23 epoch data24 that appeared at the end of the 221 years of astronomy and accepted as correct by all astrologers except for those of the Puṇḍarīka Transmission and the Elimination of Error Tradition,25 calculating backward shows that on the full moon of that Vaiśākha, the planetary day was day one26 and was forty hours old.
The moon’s lunar mansion was sixteen and one hour.27 The lunar mansion position of the face of Rāhu was sixteen and twenty-nine hours.
Using siddhānta astronomy epoch data from the Puṇḍarīka Transmission, the planetary day was day one and thirty-eight hours.
The moon’s lunar mansion was sixteen exactly, and the face of Rāhu was also sixteen and twenty-nine hours. Therefore, the claim that on the day the conqueror became a Buddha, at dawn the moon was held by Rāhu28 is confirmed. How is such a claim made? A Vinaya passage states:
When the Conqueror attained the highest wisdom, Yaśodhara gave birth to a son, and the moon was held by Rāhu.
When he was born the moon was held by Rāhu. Therefore, the child’s name was also Rāhula.29
In the Abhiniṣkramaṇasūtra it says:
To King Śuddhodana, his people said, “Please the gods!
The prince has attained the highest wisdom!” When that was heard, and on that very day, a son was born to Yaśodhara and a son was born to Amṛtodana.
On that day also, the moon was held by Rāhu.30
If our teacher taught the Root Tantra when he was close to passing away, doesn’t this contradict the quote “Then in the twelfth month on the Caitra full moon…?” Doesn’t this line from the commentary explain that our teacher attained complete enlightenment on the Vaiśākha full moon and on the Caitra full moon of the following year he taught the Root Tantra?
To avoid any contradiction that might arise on this point, the omniscient dharma master Butön and his followers hold that the quote “Then in the twelfth month on the Caitra full moon” and the prophecy that six hundred years after the Buddha passed away Mañjuśrī Yaśas would appear are both valid, and assert that our teacher taught the Root Tantra in the second year of his enlightenment.
They present many reasons why the two commentary quotes are not contradictory. The Jonang dharma master Choglé Namgyal31 and his followers say that the quote beginning “Six hundred years after I have passed away… ” is merely a note in the margins of the Indian text and therefore is invalid. The Jonang followers assert that our teacher taught the Root Tantra in the second year of his enlightenment. Such claims can be understood as being wrong.
If they were correct, then consider this.
When our Teacher attained complete enlightenment it was the full moon night of Vaiśākha, and the moon was held by Rāhu, the sutra reference of which has been explained previously.
According to the above claims, the first year of the six hundred years mentioned in the prophecy concerning the coming of Mañjuśrī Yaśas would have been the male tāraṇa Wood Monkey year.32 Therefore, the preceding years would have been Water Sheep, Water Horse, Iron Snake, Iron Dragon, Earth Rabbit, and Earth Tiger. The following years would have been Wood Bird and so forth. If the above assertions were correct, then in one of those years, on the full moon of Vaiśākha there would have been an eclipse. However, the charts establish that there was no eclipse on the full moon of Vaiśākha of any of those years. This is because if a reverse calculation is made using karaṇa epoch data that arose after the 221 years of astronomy and accepted as being authentic during the time of karaṇa astronomy by all astrologers , then for none of those years is it possible to construct a chart in which Rāhu eclipses the full moon night of Vaiśākha.
However, the Great Commentary says:
As dawn approached on the full moon of Vaiśākha, the Conqueror, the mighty one of the Śākya, became a complete buddha. He turned the wheels of dharma and  taught the three vehicles. Then in the twelfth month on the Caitra full moon in Śrī Dhānyakaṭaka…33 Doesn’t this indicate that the Root Tantra was taught in the second complete year of his enlightenment on the full moon of Caitra?
Such a conclusion arises from holding Caitra always to be the first month in the Kālacakra tradition and Phālguna as always being the twelfth.
The reality is that, in Kālacakra thinking, months are formed by being either “waxing-led” or “waning-led.”34 On the basis of being waxing-led, Caitra is the first of the months and Phālguna is the twelfth.
On the basis of being waning-led, Vaiśākha is the first of the months and Caitra is the twelfth. The reasons for designating months in this way is as follows.
In Kālacakra thinking the beginning of the seasons is established by the sun entering Aries at the spring equinox during either the waxing or waning phases of the moon.
The mean sun entering Aries will appear between the first lunar day and the empty-sky lunar day35 of a waxing-led Caitra.
When this mean sun appears between the first and the fifteenth of the month, Aries, as the beginning of the seasons, is assigned to waxing-led Caitra.
When the mean sun entering Aries appears between the sixteenth lunar day and the empty-sky lunar day, Aries as the beginning of the season is assigned to a waning-led Vaiśākha month. In this case Vaiśākha is the first month and Caitra is the twelfth.
In the Realms chapter, in the ninth summary, it says:
In this continent, south of Meru, when the sun dwells in Aries, it is Vaiśākha in the season of spring.36 Generally, months were designated this way.
Therefore, “Then in the twelfth month on the Caitra full moon,” from the quote above, is made on the basis of a waning-led Vaiśākha as the first month and Caitra as the twelfth month.
The line “Then in the twelfth month on the Caitra full moon” and so on is commentary to “The end of Caitra is at the time of waxing,” and so forth.
“The end of Caitra” and so forth explains the full moon of Caitra as being the end of the Caitra month.
Immediately before the quote “Then in the twelfth month on the Caitra full moon” is the passage:
Here in India after the last of the fifteen days of the bright side begins the first day of the dark side. Therefore, as dawn approached on the full moon of Vaiśākha, the Conqueror, the mighty one of the Śākya, became a complete buddha.”
This indicates that the end of the full moon of Caitra, which begins the days of waning, is the beginning of Vaiśākha and is the first month of the year.
The quote beginning “Mañjuśrī also, six hundred years after I have passed away” can therefore be left as it is, and the above commentary quotes are freed of contradiction.37 Therefore, as asserted by those of the earlier traditions of Ra and Dro, by Palden Lama Dampa,38 and as explained by the Puṇḍarīka Transmission, the explanation that the Conqueror taught the Root Tantra on the full moon of Caitra as he approached his passing away can be seen to be correct.
To summarize, the focus of the doubts is whether our teacher taught the Root Tantra in the year in which he passed away or in the year following his enlightenment. If the second year of his enlightenment is posited as the year he taught the Root Tantra, an eclipse of the moon on the night of the full moon of Vaiśākha at the time of his enlightenment cannot in any way be constructed in the charts.
Some 39 have constructed a chart showing an eclipse on the full moon of Vaiśākha of the viśva Water Horse year just before the beginning of the prophesied six hundred years.
This is a reverse calculation using karaṇa astronomy, but within this particular method of calculation there are many quantitative faults regarding the sun and the planets in the 1,682 years,40 and so it is not valid.
Some 41 have formulated an eclipse of the full moon in Vaiśākha of the vyaya Iron Snake year occurring in daytime. The way the chart was constructed is correct, but there is no terminology for Rāhu grasping the moon in the daytime.
Moreover, the quote from the Abhiniṣkramaṇasūtra says:
To King Śuddhodana, his people said, “Please the gods! The prince has attained the highest wisdom!” When that was heard, and on that very day, a son was born to Yaśodhara and a son was born to Amṛtodana.
On that day also, the moon was held by Rāhu.42 This passage speaks as if the moon being held by Rāhu was actually seen by those around King Śuddhodana.
Concerning the phrase “on that day,” the calculation of one complete day is referred to as the “calculation of a day.” Similarly, it is the complete day within which the eclipse occurred that is spoken of in the phrase “on that day.”
Therefore, our teacher taught the Root Tantra on the full moon of Caitra just before he passed away. The time of his passing is established as being the final part of the Vaiśākha full moon of vikrama Iron Dragon year. Eighty-one years back from that year is the Iron Monkey year and is established as the year of our teacher’s birth.
The month, the date, and planetary positions can be known by a thorough study of the Puṇḍarīka Transmission. Compilation of the Tantra This has two outlines:
1.Compilation of the Root Tantra
2.Compilation of the Condensed Tantra
Compilation of the Root Tantra In the Realms chapter, in the third summary it says:
Because of the ascertainment of the Tathāgata, the twelve-thousand-verse King of Tantras and the Extensive Commentary of sixty thousand verses were written down in the languages of Shambhala and other lands and were taught by King Sucandra to those who lived in the many towns of the ninety-six lands.43 Our teacher taught the Root Tantra on the full moon of Caitra in the Iron Dragon year. King Sucandra memorized the text and returned to Shambhala. After our teacher passed away, he wrote down the Root Tantra as well as his own composition, the sixty-thousand-verse Extensive Commentary, in the language of Shambhala. These he taught to the ninety-six kings of the nine hundred and sixty million towns and to other fortunate beings for three years from the Iron Dragon year to the Water Horse year. Having completed his teachings in the Water Horse year, in the following Water Sheep year he created the Kālacakra mandala in order to bring about the causes of siddhi in others.
There he displayed magical powers and passed away. Where was this mandala created, and how was it created? South of the city of Kalāpa is the park of Malaya, twelve yojana across and of the same size as Kalāpa. There in its the center, built entirely of the five precious stones whose nature was that of gods and goddesses, stood the body mandala with four sides and four entrances.
It was four hundred cubits wide, adorned by four portals and the eight cemeteries, enclosed by five walls, surrounded by the four mandala environments of earth and so forth and encircled by the vajra garland.
Within the body mandala and of half its size was the speech mandala with four sides and four entrances, adorned by four portals and enclosed by five walls.
In the center of the speech mandala and of half its size again was the mind mandala with four sides and four entrances, adorned by four portals and enclosed by three walls.
In the center of the mind mandala and of half its size was the mandala of gnosis, beautified by sixteen pillars.
In its center and of half its size was a lotus of eight petals. This mandala, with every feature complete, was created by the power of mind.
That Sucandra compiled the Kālacakra Root Tantra after our teacher had passed away is verified by the Great Commentary:
In this noble country the Tathāgata attained complete enlightenment. When the Conqueror passed away, the compilers wrote down the three vehicles.44
Compilation of the Condensed Tantra After King Sucandra passed away, Sureśvara and the other five dharma kings taught the Root Tantra for the next six hundred years beginning from the Wood Monkey year, the first of the prophesied six hundred years.
Then, as it says in the Realms chapter, in the third summary:
Mañjuśrī became King Yaśas and from the bodhisattva lion throne taught the dharma for a hundred years. When the hundred years ended…45 King Mañjuśrī Yaśas taught the Root Tantra for a hundred years.
Then, with the power of the blessings of the Tathāgata’s prophecy as a cause, and knowing with his five kinds of clairvoyance that the minds of Sūryaratha and the other ṛṣi were fully ripened and would move to the perfect path, on the Phālguna full moon of the hundredth year, the rudhirodgārin Water Pig year, he gathered his intended disciples, Sūryaratha and the other thirty-five million Brahmin ṛṣi, in the mansion of the Kālacakra mandala created by King Sucandra.
There he announced:
Sūryaratha and you other Brahmin ṛṣi, my words will produce the perfection of omniscience. Listen! Next month on the full moon of Caitra I will give you the teachings of the Vajra Vehicle.
As soon as he had spoken these words, the ṛṣi fainted from fear.
Seeing that this teaching and the thoughts of the ṛṣi were in conflict, King Mañjuśrī Yaśas said:
I will lead you into this mansion of the conqueror Kālacakra and give both worldly and nonworldly initiations. Furthermore, by my command, you should eat, drink, and create relationships through marriage in accord with the vajra caste.
If you choose not to do this, then leave my nine hundred and sixty million towns and go where you will. Otherwise, after eight hundred years the descendants of your castes will spread the barbarian dharma… And so on until: Therefore, do as I say.
These words of King Mañjuśrī Yaśas with his admonishment struck the Brahmin ṛṣi like thunderbolts, and they called to Sūryaratha:
Sūryaratha, tell King Mañjuśrī Yaśas that we will not enter the initiation of the vajra caste and that therefore, by his command, it would be better to go to the noble land of India.
Sūryaratha addressed the mighty Mañjuśrī Yaśas with words of praise for his qualities, beginning “O great king, supreme king,” and so on.
He continued : Show kindness to those who live within their own castes. If we must do as you say without question, we will not enter the initiation of the vajra caste, but by your command, it would be best for us to go south of the Śīta River to the noble land of India, which lies between the snow mountains and the island of Lanka.
King Mañjuśrī Yaśas replied:
Then quickly leave the land of Shambhala.
On the command of King Mañjuśrī Yaśas, the Brahmin ṛṣi all rose and left the city of Kalapa. On the tenth day they entered a forest.
With his clairvoyant powers King Mañjuśrī Yaśas was aware of this, and with many reasons in mind he entered the  meditative concentration known as deluding the castes of Viṣṇu, Brahmā, and Rudra to temporarily bewitch the ṛṣi and to bring them back.
By the power of that meditative concentration and the blessings of the gods, the ṛṣi were so spellbound that local hunters and others were able to capture them and carry them back to place them at the feet of mighty Mañjuśrī Yaśas.
Once the ṛṣi were freed from the spell and saw the king, the mandala, and Malaya Park, they were amazed, and as they uttered words of astonishment, Sāgaramati, the king’s minister and an emanation, praised King Mañjuśrī Yaśas and urged the ṛṣi to petition the king for initiation into Kālacakra. By the power of these words and by the blessings of the buddhas, the dharma minds of Sūryaratha and the other ṛṣi were truly awakened.
The ṛṣi urged Sūryaratha to make the request.
In response, and together with all the ṛṣi, he prostrated to the feet of King Mañjuśrī Yaśas, offered a mandala made of jewels and gold flowers, and made his petition:
Bestow the worldly and nonworldly initiations, abridge the king of tantras within the Supreme Original Buddha46 with a shorter version of the twelve thousand verses of the Original Buddha as taught to King Sucandra by the Tathāgata, and teach it to the ṛṣi.47
Mañjuśrī Yaśas listened to Sūryaratha’s plea, and because of the inclination of the Brahmin ṛṣi and the power of the Tathāgata’s blessings, he compiled the Condensed Tantra.
In what style was that accomplished?
Sūryaratha and the others were adherents to good grammar, and to wean them away from their attachment to that the king employed “reliance upon meanings,”48 whereupon some verses had bad grammar, some had poor line and word separation, some had no grammatical cases, while in others vowels and consonants were omitted.
In some verses short vowels were long while  long vowels were short.
Some that should have been in the fifth case were in the seventh, and some of the fourth case were in the sixth.
Therefore, encased in the sragdhara meter and consisting of 86,520 syllables, with each verse possessing eighty-four syllables, the twelve thousand verses of the Original Buddha were condensed into 1,030 verses and taught to the ṛṣi.
This is mentioned in the Root Tantra, quoted in the Realms chapter, in the third summary:
Therefore this condensed essential meaning
is asserted by myself the omniscient one.
In sragdhara verses of thirty more than ten hundred,
in five chapters, the glorious tantra complete,
will be taught by the king of orators.
He too will be the compiler.49
However, in the current Jonang translations there are 1,042 verses, while in the Gyijo50 and Ma51 translations there are 1,043.
On top of that, there are two verses from the Gnosis chapter, quoted in the Great Commentary in the Supreme and Unchanging Gnosis summary, that are not found in these root translations.52 These are the 170th verse that begins, “Karma arises from disturbed states of minds, and from that comes suffering.
Disturbed states of mind arise from one’s suffering,” and verse 182.
Together these make up 1,045 verses.
How is this to be explained?
Thirteen verses, comprising ten verses beginning with verse 252 of the Gnosis chapter that begins, “The glorious dharma,” plus the last verse of the Inner chapter beginning, “You are the mother, you are the father,” as well as the ninety-fourth verse of the Realms chapter beginning, “Glorious Kālacakra,” and verse 149 of the Realms chapter beginning, “On the pure supreme foundation,” are the words of King Mañjuśrī Yaśas and Sūryaratha, and are not compiled from the Root Tantra.
Also it is said that the ninety-fourth verse of the Gnosis chapter is not compiled from the Root Tantra. This clearly leaves one verse not compiled from the Root Tantra, and that is something to examine.
Apart from those fifteen, the remaining 1,030 verses have been compiled from the Root Tantra. How the Root Tantra and the Condensed Tantra were taught by the dharma kings and the Kalkī kings of Shambhala This section is divided into two: 1.The main explanation 2.The duration of these teachings and the duration of the Buddha’s teachings in general
The dharma king Sucandra taught the Root Tantra for three years. After he passed away, six dharma kings each taught the Root Tantra for a hundred years. These six kings are spoken of in the Root Tantra, which is quoted in the Realms chapter in third summary: Sucandra, Sureśvara, Tejī,
Somatta, Sureśvara, Viśvamūrti, and Sureśāna53
The text continues to explain who these kings were emanations of:
Vajrapāṇi is you Sucandra,
then Kṣitigarbha, Yamāntaka,
Viṣkambhī, Jambhaka, Mānaka, Khagarbha.54 Sureśāna taught the Root Tantra for a hundred years. After him his son, Kalkī Mañjuśrī Yaśas, taught the Root Tantra for a hundred years. In the hundredth year in the male Wood Rat year on the Caitra full moon, he gave initiation to Sūryaratha and the other ṛṣi, compiled the Condensed Tantra, and passed away.
In that male Wood Rat year, his son Puṇḍarīka composed the Vimalaprabhā or Great Commentary.
From then on, for eight hundred years, Puṇḍarīka and seven other Kalkīs taught the Condensed Tantra together with its commentary, each teaching for a hundred years.
In the Realms chapter of the Great Commentary, in the ninth summary, it says:
“Naga hundred years from then”: naga  hundred years from the time of Yaśas’s passing, definitely  the dharma of the barbarians will enter the land of Makha.55 This teaches that eight hundred years after the passing of King Mañjuśrī Yaśas, the barbarians would enter the land of Makha. In the “easy to understand” verses of the Realms chapter it says: Among the Kalkīs, sons and grandsons
of time multiplied by hands, will have passed away, and at that time and without doubt, the barbarian dharma will enter the land of Makha.56 “Hands” here means two and “time” means four. After eight Kalkīs comprising Mañjuśrī Yaśas, his son Puṇḍarīka, his grandson Bhadra, and the others have passed away, the barbarians will enter the land of Makha.
Therefore, eight hundred years after the passing of Mañjuśrī Yaśas, the barbarians entered the land of Makha, and from his passing until that time, Puṇḍarīka and seven others appeared.
This establishes that the eight Kalkīs from Puṇḍarīka to Subhadra each taught the dharma for a hundred years.
The nine Kalkīs from Mañjuśrī Yaśas to Subhadra are spoken of in the Root Tantra quoted in the third summary of the Realms chapter:
Yaśas of Kalkī line,
then Kalkī Puṇḍarīka,
and Kalkī Bhadra, these three.
Likewise, the fourth, Vijaya, then Sumitrabhadra, Ratnapāṇi,
the seventh, Viṣṇugupta,
Sūryakīrti, and Subhadra.57
As soon as Subhadra passed away, the barbarians arrived, and Kalkī Samudravijaya ascended to the throne. Samudravijaya taught the dharma for 182 years.
After him came Kalkī Aja, who taught the dharma for 221 years. Therefore, the six dharma kings and twenty-three Kalkīs are similar in that they each taught for a hundred years.
The reigns of Samudra vijaya and Aja, however, lasted more than a hundred years. This can be known as follows.
In the ninth summary it says:
Six hundred years after the Tathāgata is the time of Mañjuśrī.58 This establishes the time of King Mañjuśrī Yaśas. Similarly eight hundred years from then is the time of the barbarians.
This establishes the time of the arrival of the barbarians. Similarly:
Less 182 years from the time of the barbarians is the time of Kalkī Aja, who reformed the abridged karaṇa astronomy.
The years from the time of the barbarians arriving in Makha until the last of the 221 years of astronomy are the fire, sky, and ocean years. Subtracting 182 years from the fire, sky, and ocean years is to arrive at the first year of the 221 years of astronomy. That year is the time that Kalkī Aja appears. Establishing the fire, sky, and ocean years is primarily for the purpose of knowing the number of years that have passed since the barbarians arrived, but it is also for knowing the dates of these two kings. It is incorrect to assert, as those of the past have done, that every Kalkī ruled for a hundred years.
This is because from the time the barbarians first arrived in Makha until they are destroyed by Kalkī Rudra, their barbarian dharma will have been in existence for 1,800 years, and from the time of Kalkī Samudravijaya ascending to the throne simultaneous with the arrival of the barbarians until the coming of Kalkī Rudracakrī, the number of Kalkīs does not exceed sixteen.
Therefore, positing the reigns of Samudra vijaya and Aja as totaling 403 years accords perfectly with the duration of the barbarians, because each of the hundred years of the fourteen Kalkīs from Sūrya to Rudra, added to the 403 years of Samudravijaya and Durjaya totals 1,803 years.
The Later Kālacakra Tantra establishes the barbarian duration as eighteen hundred years:
For eighteen years times a hundred in Makha, and elsewhere in noble lands, are those renowned as barbarians, those of the darkness. These I will destroy.59 In the “easy to understand” verses of the Realms chapter from the new Jonang translations it says: In every continent, during the four ages, the barbarians will enter,
remaining there for a hundred of eight and one years. Then their dharma will decline.60 “A hundred of eight and one years” is written using another system of enumeration.
Putting eight last and one first and multiplying that by a hundred totals one thousand eight hundred.
The sum of the reigns of the Kalkī kings from Samudravijaya onward must tally with the duration of the barbarians, and because of the differences found in the reigns of Samudravijaya and Aja,  it can be established that the remaining fourteen Kalkīs each reigned for a hundred years.
The sixteen Kalkīs beginning from Samudravijaya are stated in the Root Tantra:
Samudravijaya, Aja, Kalkī Sūrya is the twelfth,
Viśvarūpa, Śaśiprabha, Ananta, and Mahīpala,
Śrīpala, Hari, Vikrama, Mahābala, and Aniruddha,
Narasiṃha, Maheśvara, Kalkī Anantavijaya,
then his son, again the Kalkī Yaśas,
as Kalkī Rudra, possessed of the great wheel,
who by skillful speech, the best of horses samādhi,61
will put an end to the barbarian dharma.
For the skillful teacher of Sūryaratha and the others,
Sucandra, you will compile the Root Tantra
and be the composer of an extensive commentary,
and here sentient beings will be ripened.
For the condensed tantra of Vajra Mañjuśrī, Padmapāṇi62 will compose the commentary.63 Therefore, from King Sucandra to Kalkī Rudracakrī, thirty-two kings will have reigned.
Rudracakrī also reigns for a hundred years.
In the “easy to understand” verses in the Realms chapter it says:
For a hundred years on the final throne of the thirty-two will sit the enemy of the asura, possessor of the wheel.64
Vajra Mañjuśrī, Kalkī of the vajra caste, bowed to by the king of the gods, the supreme god.65 This states that Mañjuśrī Yaśas was an emanation of Mañjuśrī. Because he amalgamated the four castes into the vajra lineage, he is spoken of as a Kalkī. The verses continue:
At the end of the ages, from the succession of twenty-five reigns,
the caste of Kalkī bowed to by the greatest of gods, the wrathful Kalkī will appear.66 This teaches that the number of Kalkīs from Mañjuśrī Yaśas to Rudracakrī is ascertained at twenty-five, and that of the four ages of our teacher’s doctrine,67  the Kalkī Rudra will appear at the end of the age of troubles.
Therefore, Rudracakrī appears when our teacher Śākyamuni’s doctrine of tantra has reached the end of the age of troubles, and eighteen hundred years will have passed since the arrival of the barbarians in Makha. In the ninety-seventh year of his reign, aided by the armies of the twelve great gods and others, Kalkī Rudra will leave Shambhala to journey to the noble land south of the Śīta River, and there, in lesser Jambudvīpa, they will defeat in battle the armies of the barbarians with their asura allies and bring them and others dwelling in the barbarian dharma to the Vajra Vehicle. Then, clockwise from lesser Jambudvīpa, they will enter the other eleven sectors68 one by one, and where the Vajra Vehicle of our teacher Śākyamuni has declined at the end of the era of troubles, they will restore it. In all twelve sectors, thereby, the teachings of the victorious Vajra Vehicle will bring about an era of completeness.
With such an accomplishment and his hundred-year life at an end, his two sons, Brahmā, an emanation of Mañjuśrī, and Indra, an emanation of Avalokiteśvara, will be appointed teachers of the Vajra Vehicle, and Rudra will pass away.
Brahmā will be the dharma teacher in Shambhala north of the Śīta River for eight hundred years, while Indra will be the teacher of dharma in the noble country and other lands. In this way, Rudracakrī brings the Vajra Vehicle of the Conqueror at the end of the age of troubles into an age of completeness.
How long will that doctrine last?
In each continent it will last for eighteen hundred years.
In the “easy to understand” verses in the Realms chapter it says:
The ages of completeness, of three, of two, and of troubles
is ascertained by the measurements of None Higher.69 As this quote states, the total duration of the four ages of the restoration of the doctrine by Rudracakrī in the twelve continents is the length of one day in the realm of None Higher,70 or in the human realm, 21,600 years.
That divided by twelve is eighteen hundred and that is the duration of the four ages in each of the twelve sectors.
Moreover, concerning the length of each of the  four ages of completeness, three, two and troubles, the tantra says:
As to the length of each, a hundred human years multiplied by time and arrow.71 Therefore, the sum of each of the ages’ duration in the twelve sectors is 5,400 years.
That divided by twelve is 450 and is the duration of each age in each of the twelve sectors. Therefore, the duration of the doctrine known as the four ages is of two kinds:
the earlier four ages of the Buddha’s doctrine and the later four ages of Rudracakrī’s restoration of the doctrine.
The four ages of the Conqueror’s doctrine run from his passing until Rudracakrī has completed ninety-seven years. This is a total of 3,304 years.
These years are made up of the four years from our Teacher delivering the Root Tantra until the passing of Sucandra, seven hundred years from King Sureśvara until the passing of Mañjuśrī Yaśas, eight hundred years from Puṇḍarīka until the passing of Subhadra, the 403 years of Samudravijaya and Aja, the 1,300 years of the thirteen Kalkīs from Sūrya to Anantavijaya and the ninety-seven years of Rudracakrī.
However, if Rudracakrī defeats the barbarians at the age of ninety-seven, in the “easy to understand” verses in the Realms chapter of the Tantra it says:
The barbarian hordes destroyed with allies, at half one hundred human years, the accomplishment of the Kalkī
in the great celestially designed palace behind Kailash.72
Doesn’t this quote say that Rudracakrī will destroy the barbarians and their allies at the age of fifty and then pass away in Shambhala behind the mountain of Kailash? There is no contradiction.
This quote explains that Kalkī Rudra, from his ninety-eighth year until the completion of his hundred years, will thoroughly destroy the barbarian hordes and their allies who have accepted  the barbarian dharma.
Having weakened the non-dharma flourishing at the end of the age of troubles in the twelve sectors, he will appoint his sons Brahmā and Indra as dharma teachers at the end of his hundred years. Half one hundred, or fifty human years, after his passing into great bliss, the barbarians that he defeated and their allies will accomplish the path of the Kalkī. Where will this occur?
In Shambhala, in the great celestially designed palace behind Kailash.
If it were otherwise, and Kalkī Rudra defeats the barbarians at the age of fifty, then the barbarian duration of eighteen hundred years would be fifty years short. Furthermore, the Tantra says: For a hundred years on the final throne of the thirty-two, will sit the enemy of the asura, possessor of the wheel.73
This states that Kalkī Rudra reigns for a hundred years.
In the age of completeness every dharma of the barbarians will be destroyed by the master of the three worlds.
Appointing Brahmā for eight hundred years, he will travel to the place of bliss.74 This explains that immediately after destroying the barbarian dharma, Brahmā will be appointed dharma teacher for eight hundred years, and Rudra will travel to the place of bliss, meaning that he will pass away. It was previously explained that our teacher became a buddha and passed away on vaiśākha full moons. In the Realms chapter, in the second summary, it says:
Internally, “corpse” refers to the cessation of 21,600 in and out breaths, less 3,600.75 This passage explains that the Vajrapāṇi emanation King Sucandra was a tenth-level bodhisattva who had not yet negated two sets of 1,800 breaths.76 There are similar explanations of the Mañjuśrī and Avalokiteśvara emanations, Mañjuśrī Yaśas and Puṇḍarīka, as being tenth-level bodhisattvas.
Furthermore, in the Realms chapter of the Great Commentary, in the seventh summary, in the part where it explains how the profound meaning of the Kālacakra is not for the attachment-free listeners,77  it begins, “Those free of attachment, the noble Ānanda and others,”78 and goes on to explain how the profound meaning is not for the noble Ānanda and others.
These statements and others are made in accordance with the views of the common vehicle in which disciples take the deeds of the Buddha and the emanations of bodhisattvas and śrāvakas as being factually true in the way they were performed.
However, the final thinking of the Root Tantra, the Condensed Tantra, and the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries is expressed in the Great Commentary:
The conquering Buddha in countless, countless emanated illusory and nonobscured forms in the great thousand world realms engages in the languages of every sentient being when various supplicants request the Buddha in the limitless tongues of limitless sentient beings. With omniscient speech he teaches worldly and nonworldly dharma. Yet the omniscient one is not more than one.
Therefore, in order to teach worldly and nonworldly dharma to all sentient beings, the conquering Buddha first became the powerful one of the twelve levels, then with skilful and great magic, with great visual illusion, he took birth from the womb of Māyādevī, wife of Śuddhodana, king of the Śākya clan, to become the youth Siddārtha.79 As this quote indicates, Śākyamuni had already attained complete enlightenment in the past, and in the course of working for the benefit of countless sentient beings with countless emanations, in this world he manifested enlightenment and passing away. Similarly, Vajrapāṇi, Mañjuśrī, Avalo kiteśvara, and others had already attained complete enlightenment when they took the form of tenth-level bodhisattvas and worked for the benefit of others. These and other examples are beyond the scope of thought.
In the Realms chapter of the Great Commentary, in the third summary, it says:
The great one of the world dwelt in the hells for the sake of sentient beings.
There the messengers of death and the lords of death spoke these words of praise, “Although free from the chains of existence, he holds to existence for the sake of sentient beings.
He is here to teach in order to empty hell and not as a result of previous actions.
The taints of the mind have been burned off by the fire of wisdom, a mind always moist  with flawless compassion, whose deeds, without conception, are joyfully done for the benefit of sentient beings. To the Buddha we prostrate.80 More specifically in Bright Lamp it says:
Why in this world are the venerable Ānanda and others renowned as compilers of scripture?
Ānanda is the great bodhisattva Samantabhadra. He is Vajrapāṇi, undifferentiated from the great Vajradhara.
Otherwise, how could Vajrapāṇi, having heard from the Tathāgata the eighty-four thousand volumes of sutra, memorize them on a single hearing without omission or addition?81 As scriptural support for the above, a passage from a highest yoga tantra called Special Secrets is quoted:
Furthermore, I will explain the perfect entourage of the omniscient one. It is like this:
Mañjuśrī was the great king Śuddhodana.82 Therefore, when the Conqueror taught the highest tantras, the teacher, compilers, and entourage of listeners were emanations of the Buddha and of the same continuum as the Teacher himself. Even those of the commonly accepted entourage such as Ānanda and King Śuddhodana were emanations of the Teacher and of the same continuum as the compilers of the tantras. Similarly, it should be known that it is the final thinking of the Kālacakra Root Tantra and its commentaries that King Sucandra and others, who were at the special gathering for the teaching of the Root Tantra, were also emanations of the Teacher. The Hevajra Tantra says:
The teacher is me, the dharma too is me. The gathering and the listeners are me.
The teacher of the world and the practices are me.
The worldly and the nonworldly are me.83 In the commentary to the above by Vajragarbha it says:
“The worldly and the nonworldly are me” means that all that is held with certainty by infantile beings — the Buddha and his queens, the sensual pleasure, the entourage, the teachings of the dharma, the teacher, the listeners, and teaching by desire84 — are to be refuted. These are for developing the insights of sentient beings in the future. They are the play of the buddhas.
In reality, the form of a buddha is as a vajra, immovable as an ox.85
The duration of these teachings and the duration of the Buddha’s teachings in general
In the sutra tradition the duration of the teachings has been variously put at one thousand years, two thousand years, and so on. In some volumes of the Sutra of the Good Eon86 the duration is said to be five thousand years.
In Destroying Harm to the Three Mothers it says, “It is taught that the Tathāgata’s teaching will last for five thousand years.”87 Āchārya Mañjukīrti also says that the teachings would remain for five thousand years.
Therefore, these claims can be taken literally, while other estimates found in the sutras, such as one thousand years, were taught, as the commentary Illuminating Reality says,88 for specific reasons. This position is accepted by many masters, including those of the Sakya tradition, and therefore the five-thousand-year duration will be explained here. The five thousand years are divided into ten sets of five hundred years. In the first three sets many arhats, nonreturners, and stream-enterers89 appeared. These first three periods are known, therefore, as the period of the arhat, the period of the nonreturner, and the period of the stream-enterer respectively.
Collectively they will be known as the three periods of realization.
In the following three sets of five hundred years, many beings endowed with special insight, meditative concentration, and morality appeared. These three periods are known individually as the periods of special insight and so forth and collectively as the three periods of practice. In the next three sets of five hundred years many teachers of Abhidharma, Sutra, and Vinaya will appear. Individually these periods will be known as the periods of Abhidharma and so forth. Collectively they will be called the three periods of transmission.
In the last five hundred years there will be no pure views or practice and only the outward signs of monasticism will be adhered to. This period will be known, therefore, as the period of adherence to mere signs.
These are the five thousand years from the passing of the Buddha until the completion of the period of adherence to mere signs. This is the duration of the Perfection Vehicle teachings.
However, this is not duration of the teachings based upon the Vajra Vehicle.
As there is no presentation of the special path of mantra within the canon of the Perfection Vehicle,  there is no reason for it to state the duration of the teachings of the Vajra Vehicle.
Therefore, the duration of the teachings of the Vajra Vehicle is as taught in the Kālacakra Tantra and its commentaries.
The four ages of Śākyamuni’s mantra teachings begin from the time of his teaching the Root Tantra and his passing until the time Kalkī Rudracakrī first defeats the barbarians. This has been explained as totaling 3,304 years. To this is added the four ages that make up the eighteen hundred years of Rudracakrī’s restoration in Greater Jambudvīpa. This comes to 5,104 years.
Therefore, the duration as explained here and the duration as explained in the sutras differ by about a hundred years.
This, however, is no error because the duration of the Perfection Vehicle teachings and of the Vajra Vehicle teachings are separate presentations from separate canons.
For example, in the glorious Kālacakra and its commentaries, it is explained that in the northern continent of Uttarakuru, both sets of the four ages of the teachings will arise after each other, whereas in the Perfection Vehicle canon it is stated that the beings of Uttarakuru are unsuitable vessels for the Conqueror’s teachings. How much time has already passed and how much remains?
Those of the past would have calculated, to quote one set of figures, that from the time of the Buddha’s passing to this śobhana female Water Rabbit year,90 3,615 years have passed.
Many differing calculations exist. Using the Śrī Kālacakra Tantra and commentaries as a basis, four years elapsed from the time of the Buddha’s passing until the passing of King Sucandra.
From then until the death of Mañjuśrī Yaśas, seven hundred years passed.
After Yaśas came the eight hundred years from Puṇḍarīka to the arrival of the barbarians.
Then came the fire, sky, and ocean years.
Therefore, from the passing of our teacher up to the last year of the 221 years of astronomy, 1,907 years elapsed. These figures have been sequentially quoted in the Tantra and commentaries. To this total is added the number of years of the teachings of past Kālacakra masters, such as Paṇḍita Śākyaśrī up to the end of this śobhana Water Rabbit year.
This comes to seven sixty-year cycles and thirty-seven years.91 As a total this comes to 2,364 years.
Therefore, according to the Perfection Vehicle,  364 years of the period of meditative concentration have passed, and 2,636 years of the teachings remain.
According to the general duration of the teachings of the Vajra Vehicle, 2,740 years are still to pass.
Moreover, up until this śobhana Female Water Rabbit year, fifteen Kalkīs up to King Ananta have passed, and since Kalkī Mahīpala began teaching the dharma, fifty-seven years will have passed by the end of the year. Nine hundred and forty years from the end of this Water Rabbit year, Kalkī Rudracakrī will appear, and the Vajra Vehicle teachings of the conquering lion of the Śākya, such as the transmission and practice of the Śrī Kālacakra, will enter the age of completeness.
The introduction on how the Buddha taught the Root Tantra and so forth is complete. The Primordial Mind and Body The primordial mind and body: Principal themes of the highest yoga class of tantra This has two main outlines:
1.Primordial mind
2.Primordial body
Primordial mind 1.The tantras and Indian scripture: Sources for primordial mind
2.A short explanation of the content of these passages The tantras and Indian scripture: Sources for primordial mind
The Great Commentary, in the Gnosis chapter, says:
Sentient beings are buddhas. Mighty buddhas other than that are not found in the world.92
In the Initiation chapter of the Great Commentary: That which abides in the hearts of sentient beings is gnosis.
It is the indestructible sound, constantly in the character of the nāda.93
The Great Commentary in the first summary on the Inner chapter says:
“Gnosis is mixed with emptiness.” That which dwells conventionally in the body in the form of a relationship between that which is pervaded and that which pervades is gnosis dwelling in the bodies of all sentient beings as emptiness.94
Similarly in the Hevajra Tantra:
The great gnosis abides in the body.95
Sentient beings are buddhas
but are obscured by transient impurity.
Once removed, there will be buddha.96 From the Vajragarbha Commentary:
Since, from the beginning, all sentient beings are of the nature of the innate, they are buddhas.97 Similarly from the Treasury of Songs:
Not seeing the primordial nature, the foolish are deluded,
the foolish are deceived; thus speaks Saraha.98
There are many other such quotes. A short explanation of the content of these passages
This primordial mind is the ultimate basis of purification for the generation stage and completion stage taught by these tantras, their commentaries, and other Indian scriptures.
Its explanation is under six headings: 1.Identifying primordial mind 2.Synonyms 3.Its natural purity
4.The transience of the impurities
5.Its path of practice
6.Times when clear light manifests
Identifying primordial mind The primordial mind is a very subtle mind, and when manifest, it takes as its objects phenomena such as the complete absence of any limiting conceptual elaboration,99 the direct cognition of emptiness.
It has the ability to create every quality of a buddha, and it has dwelt in the continuum of every sentient being since beginningless time without interruption.
When it is purified it becomes the dharmakāya.
However this is just a partial description. When even those who have actualized the primordial mind cannot describe it in words, what need to mention those who have not.
In the Treasury of Songs it says:
The nature of the primordial cannot be shown by anyone.100
The nature of the primordial
cannot be expressed in words,
but with the eyes of the master’s teachings it will be seen.101
Advayavajra in his Commentary to the Treasury of Songs says:
That which dwells in sentient beings forever, without cause and condition,
when the time came for it to be spoken of,
even the omniscient would be lost for words.102
There are many such quotes.
Synonyms It is taught in the tantras and Indian texts under many names. These include, the innate, the mind of clear light, the dharmadhātu mind, natural clear light, primordial mind, the indestructible mind, foundation dharmakāya, and the vajra of the mind. Its natural purity This is under two headings:
It does not become good or bad by the force of circumstance.
The rays of the sun spread themselves equally upon the beautiful, such as jewels, and upon the ugly, such as filth, and yet it remains unaffected, either adversely or beneficially. Likewise, the mind of clear light is very subtle, and though it enters good states of existence such as those of the gods or bad such as those of hell, it remains unaffected by them, either adversely or beneficially.
This is because, like the sun, it is pure by nature. As an entity it never develops into the impurities of the mind.
Gold even when tarnished never becomes the tarnish. Water when dirtied never becomes the dirt. Likewise, the mind of clear light is very subtle, yet when dwelling with the impurities of deluded states of mind, conceptuality, and so forth, it never develops into the actual entities of these states of mind.
If it did, it would not be possible to eradicate, with appropriate opponent forces, the conceptuality and deluded states of mind within the clear-light mind.
Alternatively, if these impurities were eradicated, the continuum of the clear-light mind would also come to an end.
The mind of clear light therefore is pure by nature. The transience of the impurities
In a mixture of water and dirt, the water has been created from its own substantial cause into its own clear and transparent nature, and its dirtiness has come about from its own causes, such as dust and so forth, which are distinct from the water’s substantial cause. The dirt therefore can be separated from the water and is a temporary phenomenon. Similarly, the mind of clear light and the impurities of the two kinds of obscuration have been linked since time without beginning. Nevertheless, the mind of clear light is developed from its own substantial similar-type cause into its own entity of purity. The impurities, on the other hand, develop from their causes of improper mental activity and arise from the clear-light mind like fish jumping from water. They are therefore temporary phenomena, capable of being removed from a mind whose nature is clear light.
Furthermore, when water is not in contact with conditions such as dirt and dust, it is clear and transparent. Similarly, if the natural mind of clear light were separated from the causes and conditions that bring about the impurities, it would reveal its clarity in its separation from the entanglements of duality. As long as the mind of clear light dwells with impurities, such as desire generated by improper mental activity, it will not become manifest to ordinary beings even though it is everpresent. This is because it is obscured by these impurities and remains unseen. Its path of practice
Firstly, the central channel is purified and empty forms appear to the meditator. These forms are created by the practices of the yogas of withdrawal and meditative absorption which make up the branch of form accomplishment. Then the winds from the left and right channels are brought into the central channel by the yogas of prāṇāyāma and retention, which make up the branch of wind accomplishment. This manifests the mind of clear light, and the appearance of that mind as empty form becomes progressively purer. The generation of the four joys of descent and ascent develops the mind of clear light into innate bliss, which is applied to emptiness, and the gnosis of bliss and emptiness is developed.
After the completion of the yoga of retention comes the yoga of recollection, in which an actual empty form in the aspect of father-mother union is meditated upon. Also, during recollection, the mind of clear light develops into bliss and, as a consciousness, is applied to its object of emptiness. The resulting bliss-and-emptiness gnosis is meditated upon many times, which will eventually produce the mahāmudrā consort.
Reliance on this consort will develop the ability to induce unchanging bliss. From that point onward the clear-light mind develops into the 21,600 instances of unchanging bliss on the yoga of meditative concentration. This unchanging bliss is applied to emptiness, and the resulting bliss-and-emptiness gnosis is meditated upon. One by one the twelve levels are attained, and the 21,600 karmic winds are halted.
Impurities, such as the predispositions for emission,103 are gradually eradicated, and the mind of clear light in the form of unchanging bliss becomes the body of great bliss. Times when clear light manifests There are two kinds of manifestation:
natural or effortless manifestation and manifestation through the power of meditative concentration.
The first occurs when sentient beings die.
On the basis of the Kālacakratantra and its commentaries, when someone possessed of the six elements dies, first the water element weakens the fire element, then the earth element enters the water and disappears.
The water element is subsequently dried by the air element, which in turn absorbs into the space element and disappears.
At this time the knots of the central channel loosen, the flow of wind in the right and left channels is halted, and wind enters and dissolves into the central channel. When this happens, all conceptualization of transient objects ceases. The natural clear-light mind becomes separated from all limiting conceptual elaboration and takes on the aspect of a spacelike emptiness. Within that emptiness various empty forms arise of their own volition like images in a clairvoyant’s mirror. This is known as the manifestation-of-death clear light.
The Great Commentary, commenting in the Methods of Accomplishment chapter on the line beginning “Water weakens fire,” says:
“Water” and so forth means that in this human realm, at the time of death of those born from wombs, water weakens fire.
Therefore, through the power of this meditative concentration, the process of fire is weakened by water, and this is the meditator’s first practice within the body.
Then, because of there being no fire, earth loses its solidity and dissolves like salt to become liquid, dwelling within the water element.
Then the element of air  dries up every drop of water and disappears into space. In this way the elements quickly weaken. Then “the mind is the fire at the end of darkness,”104 which means that the foundation consciousness is placed in the realm of space, in fully aspected forms empty of all objects, dwelling in the middle.105
Foundation consciousness in this quote refers to the mind of clear light, and in the line “The mind is the fire at the end of darkness,” darkness is the near attainment at the time of death, while fire is the death clear light, which arises from near attainment.
This death clear light is experienced by ordinary beings but cannot be ascertained by them. Therefore, once the bardo state of one of the six kinds of existence has been formed, ordinary beings will move on powerlessly to another existence.
However the yogi meditating on the completion stage during his lifetime develops the ability to manifest the mind of clear light and sets a powerful intention106 for the ascertainment of death clear light. When he actually ascertains death clear light, he applies the clear light to emptiness and meditates on bliss and emptiness gnosis. Likewise, when the bardo existence arrives, the power of his meditation will ensure that he takes a special form of existence in his next life for the practice of tantra where the remainder of the path will be practiced and enlightenment realized.
However, in the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries, there is no presentation of attaining enlightenment during bardo existence.
There is a reason for this. Attaining enlightenment in the bardo means that death clear light is transformed into the path of the ultimate-mind isolation clear light. The clear-light mind rides upon the very subtle wind, from which arises the illusory body instead of the bardo existence. The remainder of the path is practiced in that form, and enlightenment is attained. The Three Bodhisattva Commentaries do not present such a path but assert that the empty form that appears during the meditative equipoise of the six-branched yoga is a similar-type cause of the empty-form father-and-mother union of enlightenment, and there is no basis for the accomplishment of the form body existing in the ordinary state.
This is the reason why there is no such presentation. However some scholars 107  say that the reason there is no presentation of attaining buddhahood in the bardo within the tenets of the Kālacakratantra and its commentaries is that a coarse body is necessary for the development of unchanging bliss and, therefore, supreme unchanging bliss cannot be accomplished in the bardo mental body.108 This is not correct. If that were the case, then similar consequences could be applied to the Guhyasamāja and other tantras that do assert the attaining of enlightenment in the bardo.
Manifesting the mind of clear light by the power of meditative concentration
Withdrawal and meditative absorption are the methods by which the winds enter the central channel to purify it, while vase yoga and the vajra recitation in the branch of prāṇāyāma cause the flow of the winds in the right and left channels to be cut and so enter the central channel, where the mind of clear light is made manifest.
Such a process of manifesting clear light arises from cutting the flow of the winds, or mounts of conceptuality, of the left and right channel by targeting the channels, drops, and winds of the vajra body and bringing those winds into the central channel.
The Great Commentary, in the Realms chapter, in the first summary says:
Although fire dwells constantly within wood,
by cutting and separation it is not seen.
Yet, when the fire-stick is worked with the hands,
it is seen to dwell within.
Similarly, by habitual conceptuality, the mind of clear light is not seen.
But when the right and left channel
are united as one, it will be manifest.109
As long as the mind to which objects of a transient nature appear is not halted, it is not possible to manifest the mind of clear light.
To halt such a mind, the winds must enter the dhūtī,110 and as long as the winds flow within the left and right channel, it is not possible to halt such a mind.
Some 111 have said that the primordial mind of clear light that is the subject of the previous quotes from the tantras and commentaries is identical to the buddha essence, or impure suchness, as taught in the Uttaratantra, one of the five treatises of the protector Maitreya.
They also claim that this buddha essence taught in the Uttaratantra and in the In Praise of Dharmadhātu is the causal tantra taught by the Later Guhyasamāja Tantra when it says:
Tantra it is known means continuum,
and that continuum is of three kinds.
The basis, the nature of suchness, and the invincible:
is it thus divided.112
Their assertion cannot be seen to be correct because that would mean the path of practice as taught in the Uttaratantra also would have to be the method tantra taught in the line “the basis, that of the nature of suchness” because the reasoning is the same.113 Furthermore it would also mean that to manifest buddha essence as taught in the Uttaratantra, it would be necessary to halt the flow of winds in the right and left channel and bring them to the central channel.
This is because in order to make manifest the primordial inborn mind of clear light as it is taught in the tantras and commentaries, it is necessary to halt the flow of winds in the left and right channels and to have them enter the central channel.
As the Great Commentary says in the Realms chapter, in the first summary:
Similarly, by habitual conceptuality, the mind of clear light is not seen. But when the right and left channel
are united as one, it will be manifest.114
Some  assert the existence of a buddha essence adorned with the features and signs of enlightenment, endowed with the ten powers, the four kinds of fearlessness, and every other excellent quality of abandonment.
They assert this essence to be unchanging and permanent, of ultimate existence, and dwelling inside every sentient being since beginningless time but hidden within the temporary impurities.
This they maintain is what is meant by the quotes from the tantra, such as the verses beginning “Pervading space, the vajra of space,” “Sentient beings are buddhas,” and so forth, as well as by the quotes from the commentaries quoted previously. They also maintain that this is the meaning of quotes such as that beginning “A statue of buddha wrapped in rags”115 from the Uttaratantra and similar quotes from In Praise of Dharmadhātu.
Furthermore they claim that the Prajñāpāramitā and other sutras in which the Buddha spoke of all phenomena being empty of any true existence are actually teaching an “emptiness of other,” in which the above-mentioned buddha essence is empty of “other” transient impurities.
Because this buddha essence is empty of the impurities or objects of negation and because it is truly existing, it is not an “emptiness of self.” They also claim that this is the thinking of the  Kālacakra and its commentaries.116
To this, firstly I say the following.
Of the ten powers, there is the power of the wisdom that knows what is and what is not the basis.117 Does this power know what is and what is not the basis of a hairy old dog?
If it does not know, it could not be a wisdom that knows what is and what is not the basis.
If it does know, it could not be a wisdom covered by the obscuring impurities.
Furthermore, if the meaning of statements that all phenomena are empty as found in the Prajñāpāramitā and other sutras was that the buddha essence was empty of “other” impurities, empty of the impurities to be negated, and was itself truly existing, then you would have to agree that the emptiness spoken of in these sutras as being empty of the objects to be negated would also be truly existing.
Even if you do actually assert this, it could not be correct, because in Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way it says:
The conquerors have said that emptiness uproots all views,
and that those who have a view of emptiness
will have no accomplishment.118
And from its commentary, Clear Words:
Were someone to say, “I will not give you anything at all,” and if I were to reply, “Then give me that which does not exist!” how would it be possible to hold that as not existing?
Likewise, for those who even cling to emptiness as a reality, how will they negate their clinging to reality?119 Similarly the Heap of Jewels Sutra, quoted at this point in Clear Words, says:
Kāśyapa, those who focus upon emptiness and have thoughts of emptiness fall far from my words.
Kāśyapa, to have views on self the size of Mount Meru is tolerable, but with strong pride to have views on emptiness is not.
Why is that?
Kāśyapa, if emptiness is that which uproots every view, then Kāśyapa, I say that those who have a view on emptiness alone are beyond all cure.120
These quotes state that it is wrong to have a view on any phenomenon as truly existing, and to view emptiness as truly existing is said to be an especially incurable view. Such statements do great damage to the previous assertions.
Furthermore to assert that the buddha essence is adorned by the features and signs of enlightenment, is endowed with the ten powers, the four kinds of fearlessness, and every other excellent quality of the buddha, that it is unchanging and permanent, of ultimate existence, and dwells inside every sentient being since beginningless time is completely wrong because the words of the Buddha in sutras that teach this way are not to be taken literally, and such teachings are intended for interpretation.
This is explained in Candrakīrti’s commentary to his own Madhyamakāvatāra, where he quotes from the Laṅkāvatārasūtra:
“In the teachings on the buddha essence, the Conqueror spoke of that whose nature was pure and of clear light, pure since beginningless time, endowed with the thirty-two features of enlightenment, and existing within the bodies of every sentient being.
The Conqueror taught that like a very precious jewel wrapped in dirty cloth, it lies permanent and unchanging, wrapped in the cloths of the aggregates, sensory spheres, and sense sources, eclipsed by anger, desire, and ignorance, tainted by the impurities of conceptuality.121
This passage describing a buddha essence accords with your assertions as taught by a sutra requiring interpretation. The sutra continues:
“Conqueror, Tathāgata, if that is so, how is one who teaches on tathāgata essence unlike the outsiders who teach on self?
Conqueror, the outsiders are also teachers of a self that is permanent, a nondoer, devoid of qualities, pervasive, and imperishable.” This passage states that a buddha essence described in this way is similar to the permanent self propounded by non-Buddhists and asks how it could be any different.
The sutra continues with the reply:
The Conqueror replied, “Mahāmati, my teaching of the buddha essence is not similar to the Tirthankara teachings on self.
Mahāmati, the tathāgatas, conquerors of the enemy, perfectly complete buddhas, have taught the meanings of terms such as  emptiness, perfect reality, nirvana, the unborn, the signless, the wishless, and so forth as buddha essence.
Children are frightened by no-self, and as a means to remove that fear, the door of buddha essence is shown. By doing so the nonconceptual state, the nonappearing object, is taught.
Mahāmati, those great beings, those bodhisattvas of the future and of the present, should not hold fast to a self.”122
The sentence beginning “Mahāmati, my teaching of” expresses the assertion that the teaching of the buddha essence as held by you is not similar to non-Buddhists’ teachings of a permanent self.
The list of terms beginning with “emptiness” reveals the thinking behind the teachings on buddha essence.
The words “Mahāmati, the tathāgatas, conquerors of the enemy, perfectly complete buddhas, have taught the meanings of terms,” and including the phrase “as buddha essence,” reveal the ways in which the essence was taught.
The purpose of the sentence beginning “Children” up to “remove that fear” is to reveal what is to be excluded, and the purpose of the sentence beginning “By doing so” reveals what is to be included.
The last sentence, beginning “Mahāmati, those great beings,” teaches that if the words of sutras that speak of this kind of buddha essence are held as literal, this leads to a clinging to a permanent self.
Therefore the quote ends “should not hold fast to a self,” which illustrates the actual damage done to the previous assertion.
The text immediately following the above passage beginning “Mahāmati, for example” up to “Mahāmati, in this way the tathāgatas taught and are teaching the tathāgata essence in order to guide those who hold to the outsiders’ assertion of self” explain that texts propounding a buddha essence within every sentient being, adorned with features of an enlightened being, endowed with qualities such as the ten powers and the four kinds of fearlessness, permanent and unchanging, are not to be adhered to literally but are for a particular purpose and are to be interpreted. Therefore, it can be understood that it is incorrect to explain the tantra and the Great Commentary by way of such a buddha essence.
This has been just a brief explanation.
Primordial body
The very subtle primordial mind explained above is inseparable from the very subtle wind.
This indivisible entity of very subtle wind and mind is known as the primordial body and mind.
In the confines of samsara, this primordial body and mind is the root of the aggregates, sensory spheres, sense sources of sentient beings, and of every phenomenon of samsara. All phenomena of samsara are manifestations of the indivisible entity of primordial body and mind.
In the Vajra Garland explanatory tantra it says:
Be it birth, abiding, or destruction, life or the intermediate state,
as long as it is bound by the world,
it is a manifestation of the winds of the mind.123 The Sandhivyākaraṇa Tantra says: All that is tied to sentient beings, be it with consciousness or without,
arises from the winds, is ended by the winds.
The unknowing mind dwells in the ocean of samsara,
where, by going wayward, it migrates
into dogs, jackals, cows, and horses.124 The winds and the mind migrate into different living forms, and at death the aggregates, sensory spheres, sense sources, and the coarse winds and minds withdraw into the very subtle wind and mind.
In this process the elements of earth, water, fire, and air dissolve in turn, and the minds of appearance, increase, and attainment arise in succession. When death clear light appears, there are no minds or winds of that person’s continuum present except for the very subtle wind and mind. However, because this very subtle wind and mind is the primordial wind and mind, the continuum of that person’s mind and body is not broken.
With the wind of the very subtle wind and mind of death clear light acting as a substantial cause,125 the bardo body will arise, and with the mind of the death clear light as a substantial cause, the coarse and subtle bardo minds will arise.
This is the thinking behind the two quotes above.
The yogi practicing on the path focuses on and penetrates the channels, drops, and winds and induces successively the minds of appearance, increase, attainment, and clear light.
Then the final mind isolation, with its manifest subtle mind and wind, or the path of a suitable alternative, is actualized, and from this very subtle wind and mind arises the illusory body. This illusory body is a similar-type cause of the illusory body of the enlightenment union, while the subtle mind is a similar-type cause of the dharmakāya.
This is just an introduction.
The process can be known extensively from the peerless Lantern Illuminating the Five Stages.
On individual presentations of primordial mind and primordial body in the context of Kālacakra, the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries and other commentaries concentrate primarily on subtle mind in their explanations of the winds and mind of the clear light and do not concentrate on the winds. The protector Nāgārjuna and other mahāsiddhas who wrote commentaries on the Guhyasamāja and other hidden tantras focused on the clear-light mind and wind equally in their explanations.
The reason for these differing and individual explanations is as follows. According to Three Bodhisattva Commentaries, a similar-type cause of both bodies of a buddha can be fashioned from the clear-light mind itself, and a similar-type cause of the form body of a buddha is not created from the subtle wind.
Another reason is that in the sense of being the creator of all phenomena of samsara and nirvana, the innate mind of clear light pervades everything.
According to commentaries on the Śrī Guhyasamājatantra and other hidden tantras composed by mahāsiddhas such as the protector Nāgārjuna, the mind of clear light is formed into a similar-type cause of the dharmakāya and the subtle wind becomes a similar-type cause of the form body.
These two differing explanations have come about because of differing types of disciples.
This will be explained later. This has been a brief explanation of the primordial body and mind, the basis for the accomplishment of the two bodies of a buddha.
Explanations of the intentions of the highest yoga tantras The skillful transformation of the primordial body and mind, the two special themes of highest mantra, into similar-type causes of the two bodies of a buddha is the path of the completion stage, which is the main topic of highest mantra.
The root tantras that describe this path are of two types: those that explain the stages of generation and completion in a concealed way and those that do so clearly and in an unconcealed manner.
Examples of hidden tantras would be the short condensed tantras of Hevajra, Cakrasaṃvara, and Guhyasamāja.
There are two ways in which the hidden meanings of these tantras are brought out.
The first is to explain each root tantra by relying upon individual explanatory tantras. This was the method employed by Nāgārjuna and the other mahāsiddhas of India. The second way is to explain the tantra in accordance with the thinking of Kālacakra and its commentaries.
This is the method used by the Vajragarbha Commentary, the Vajrapāṇi Commentary, and others.
Concerning the first method, the Guhyasamāja Root Tantra is explained by six explanatory tantras, such as the Vajra Garland, and these in turn have been explained by Nāgārjuna and his disciples, who taught them as the five stages of the path, beginning with the isolation of speech. The Short Cakrasaṃvara Root Tantra is explained by six explanatory tantras, such as the Samvaraudbhava, and they in turn have been explained by mahāsiddhas such as Vajraghanta in the format of the five stages, such as blessing of self and so forth.
The Short Hevajra Root Tantra is explained by its explanatory tantras, such as the Vajra Tent, Sampuṭa, Caturyogānisampuṭa, and so forth. These have been taught by the venerable Virupa in his presentation of the paths and results, which condense the actual completion stage into the paths of the three initiations.
The way that texts such as the Vajragarbha Commentary and the Vajrapāṇi Commentary explain the tantras as conforming to the thinking of Kālacakra and its commentary can be known by looking at these two commentaries, which explain the Inner and Outer, the six-branched yoga, and so forth, in light of the Kālacakra and its commentary.
Therefore it is necessary to classify commentaries into those of the mahāsiddhas of India  who explained the hidden tantras of Guhyasamāja and so forth and those such as the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries. According to the Vajragarbha Commentary, the definitive meanings of the Cakrasaṃvara and Four Seats tantras should be understood from the Five Hundred Thousand Hevajra Tantra. The definitive meanings of the hidden tantras of the Hevajra and the Short Cakrasaṃvara should be understood from the Four Seats Tantra. The definitive meanings of all of them should be understood from the root tantra of the Original Buddha Kālacakra and from the Hundred Thousand Cakrasaṃvara. The Vajragarbha Commentary says:
From Hevajra will Cakrasaṃvara and the Four Seats Tantra be understood.
Hevajra and the Short Cakrasaṃvara will be understood from the Four Seats Tantra.
From the words of the Supreme Original Buddha and from the Great Cakrasaṃvara will definitive meanings be understood.126 In this way, the verses on the six-branched yoga taught in the Later Guhyasamāja has led to two different interpretations. One accords with the six-branched yoga of Kālacakra, and the other accords with the six-branched yoga as taught by Nāgārjuna, Candrakīrti, and others. In his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations, Nāropa explains these passages of the Later Guhyasamāja Tantra in accord with the six-branched yoga of Kālacakra, while in his commentary on the Later Guhyasamāja Tantra he explains them in accord with Bright Lamp. How does the six-branched yoga taught in the Kālacakra differ from the six-branched yoga as explained by the Bright Lamp, where it is explained according to the Later Guhyasamāja Tantra?
The meaning of withdrawal in Kālacakra is that the sensory powers are withdrawn inward and do not engage their respective objects.
According to Bright Lamp, withdrawal means that the sensory powers withdraw or gather into their objects, such as visual form, to be individually enjoyed in the manner of “taxes gathering unto a tax collector.” Moreover the Great Commentary says in the Realms chapter in the second summary:
The intermediate sign is that by 1,800 supreme and unchanging instances, the first level is attained.127 This explains that the achievement of 1,800 instances of unchanging bliss by the branch of meditative concentration is the attainment of the level of an ārya, while the branch of recollection and below is at the level of an ordinary being.
Bright Lamp explains the branch of retention as being the actual clear light, the branch of recollection as the arising of the actual clear-light reversal, the branch of meditative concentration as being union, and that once the actual clear light is attained, the practitioner becomes an ārya directly cognizing emptiness.
This can be understood from the twelfth chapter of Bright Lamp, where it comments on the branch of retention:
The sinking of all apprehending is explained as being retention.
How is that?
“It is called perfect reality.
The mind becomes the cessation vajra
and the signs of near attainment arise.”
Here vajra cessation is clear light, and the mind becomes that clear light.128
In this way, Bright Lamp establishes the branch of retention as being the actual clear light.
The branch of recollection is established as being the time of the actual clear-light reversal, and this can be known from the same chapter in the section on the branch of recollection:
Therefore, having meditated upon and actualized that whose nature is clear light, the forms of miragelike appearances and so forth are recollected as they were in the attainment of perfect reality.
These emanate and are created in sequence. This should be known and understood as recollection.129
Therefore clear light is actualized in the branch of retention.
Arising from this clear light, those previous forms of miragelike appearances that arose during the entering into clear light are here recollected, and they arise like those in the “attainment of perfect reality” clear light. “These emanate and are created in sequence” in a reverse sequence. This is to be understood as being the branch of recollection.
Bright Lamp also asserts the branch of  meditative concentration as being the state of union.
If it is Bright Lamp’s assertion that the branch of retention corresponds to actual clear light, then it is true that someone who has attained the stages of recollection and meditative concentration must be an ārya. However, doesn’t the clear light explained as being the branch of retention refer to the similitude clear light?
This is not so.
In the section explaining the recollection of the “unborn,” Bright Lamp says:
The verse beginning “Within that” and so on teaches the arising of the state of union.
The unborn is the branch of retention. And so on until:
After the branch of retention comes entity clear light.
“Entity” refers to conventional truth.
“Clear light” is ultimate truth.
Clear light possessing entity is known as entity clear light.
What is that?
It is the body of the great Vajradhara, whose nature is nondual gnosis.130
Therefore, when arising from the clear light, which is explained as being the branch of retention, one arises in the body of union.
The thinking of the hidden tantras has been explained by the commentaries of the mahāsiddhas of India and by the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries, and you should not use one to refute the other, nor make the mistake of thinking that similar terms in their respective presentations have similar meanings.
Tantras that teach the paths of the generation and completion stages in an open and unconcealed way include the Root Kālacakra Tantra and Condensed Kālacakra Tantra.
The Great Commentary says in the second summary of the Realms chapter:
The Vajra Vehicle, in accord with the mentality of sentient beings, lies hidden within the vajra words in the King of Tantras. The Tathāgata said, “The fourth also is likewise.”131 The fourth is not the third and therefore is called the fourth.
“Also is likewise” means that the wisdom-knowledge132 itself becomes the fourth.
Because of these words of the Conqueror, it lies hidden within the vajra words.
In the King of Tantras the vajra words are not clear. They will be understood through the transmission of masters, and tantras will be understood from other tantras. This the Tathāgata has said.133
This passage says that in hidden tantras such as the Guhyasamāja, profound meanings, as illustrated by the fourth initiation, are explained in a concealed fashion. The quote continues:
Here in the Original Buddha, the Conqueror, has clarified those very vajra words by very clearly teaching, explaining, and well explaining.
As proof of that, the signs of smoke and so forth on the path of mahāmudrā meditation are clarified.
“Focus single pointedly upon the emptiness,
and meditate for a whole day.”134
Because of these words of the Conqueror, vajra words within the Supreme Original Buddha, such as those which teach the signs of smoke on the path of the mahāmudrā meditation, are very clear and arise neither through the transmission of masters nor by the blessing of the masters.135
Therefore the profound meanings concealed in the hidden tantras are explained clearly in the Original Buddha Root Tantra and Condensed Tantra, and it is not necessary to rely upon the explanations of masters that apply explanatory tantra to root tantra.
This has been just a brief chapter on how the thinking of the highest yoga tantras is explained.
The External World
The Three Themes of Kālacakra Tantra
An exposition of the Outer, Inner, and Other: The three themes of Kālacakra This has three outlines: 1.Ascertaining the number of themes 2.The order of the themes
3.The characteristics of each Ascertaining the number of themes The Great Commentary, in the second summary of the Realms chapter, states:
The coming together of the subtle particles is a prerequisite for the existence of a world realm.
A world realm is a precondition for sentient beings.
Sentient beings are preconditions for worldly and nonworldly initiations.
Worldly and nonworldly initiations are preconditions for the attainment of worldly siddhi up to the ultimate existence of None Higher1 by meditating upon the mandalas and gathering merit.
With worldly siddhi as a precondition, and by wisdom, merit, and the force of predispositions of emptiness and compassion — conventional and non-apprehended — from previous lives, the collection of subtle particles is transcended and conceptual meditation upon the mandalas and so forth disappears, resulting in the siddhi of gnosis of mahāmudrā.2
This passage ascertains both the number of themes and their order.
How is this done?
The main topics of the Root Tantra and Condensed Tantra are the necessary conditions for the path of practice of the primary intended disciples of Kālacakra.
Three necessary conditions for the practice of such a path can be ascertained. They are: a basis for the path of practice, the actual path of practice, and the result of practice.
The basis for the path to be practiced is ascertained as the external world and the sentient beings of the world.
The actual path of practice is ascertained as the bestowing of initiation in order  to create suitable vessels for that path, followed secondly by the generation stage, which suppresses the manifest impurity of the basis for practice and ripens the mind for the creation of the completion stage that will totally uproot this impurity.
Thirdly, the completion stage eradicates forever the impurities of the basis for practice. The paths of these initiations and of the generation and completion stages along with the results of their practices fall under the heading of “other” within the three topics of Outer, Inner, and Other. The necessary conditions for the path of the intended disciples of the Śrī Kālacakra are therefore ascertained as being the Outer, Inner, and Other, and with these in mind the chapters of the tantra are set at five.
The Realms chapter mainly establishes the basis for practice in its form of the external world, while the Inner chapter mainly establishes the basis for practice in its form of the individual person. The Other, alongside its ancillary topics, comprises the conferring of initiations, the two paths of generation and completion, and the final goal. Of these, the conferring of initiations is mainly taught in the Initiation chapter. The Methods of Accomplishment chapter mainly establishes the generation stage as well as some aspects of the completion stage.
The Gnosis chapter mainly establishes the completion stage and the stage of the final fruits of practice. The order of the themes This has two outlines:
1.A natural order 2.An order arising from the mode of practice A natural order The sentence that begins, “The coming together of the subtle particles” from the above passage says that the external world is preceded by the coming together of subtle particles.
This is because the destruction of a previous world brought about these subtle particles, which are known as empty particles and which exist as isolated fragments. Their coming together creates a physical world from the air mandala up to Meru.
This is the intermediate stage of creation. Sentient beings must be preceded by a previously created world realm, because a place for inhabitation is created first and is followed by the sentient beings who become its inhabitants.
The chapters that make up the Other are ascertained as those that teach initiations, the generation and completion stages, and the final result.
The bestowing of worldly and nonworldly initiations must be preceded by sentient beings, because there must be disciples on whom the initiations are bestowed and masters who bestow them.
The Other is primarily a similar-type cause of the form body of a buddha, and within it the generation stage is necessarily preceded by the bestowal of initiation, because those who enter the mandala without proper initiation will not become suitable vessels for the meditations of the generation stage.
The completion stage, which results in the attainment of the siddhi of mahāmudrā gnosis freed from all conceptual meditation, has to be preceded by the accomplishment of the generation stage, because the completed generation stage ripens the mindstream, and without the path of ripening, the path of freedom — of a complete and proper completion stage — will not be developed.
Therefore, as this is the natural order of things, this king of tantras in its five chapters sets out the outer, inner, and other in that order.
An order arising from the mode of practice
Before practicing the paths of generation and completion, the intended disciples of this tantra must know the external and internal bases of practice. These, therefore, are ascertained first.
The world external to oneself should be understood from an extensive explanation, and then the corresponding inner world of sentient beings should be understood.
As the Tantra says:
“As without, so within.”3 With these two bases of practice as prerequisites, one must become a suitable vessel for the two Other paths of the generation and completion stages through the process of proper initiation. Therefore, after the Outer and the Inner comes conferral of initiation.
This is followed by the generation stage to ripen the mindstream for the inception of the completion stage. After the mindstream has been suitably ripened, the completion stage is practiced.
The results of practicing these stages are the two bodies of a buddha. Therefore the order of Outer, Inner, and Other, and within Other, the order of initiation, generation stage, completion stage, and their fruits, are ascertained in this way. With this in mind the second summary in the Realms chapter states:
Therefore first is the section on the realms of the world. Then comes the section on the inner, then the section on initiation, then the section on the attainment of worldly powers, then the section on the accomplishment of supreme unchanging gnosis.
In this way the king of tantras is ordered in five sections or chapters.4
Thus the topics of the tantra are in divided into five sections, and the text that teaches them is also of five sections.
The characteristics of each This has three outlines: 1.Presentation of the external world
2.Explanation of the inner, the world of sentient beings 3.Presentation of the other: initiations, generation stage, completion stage, and fruits. Presentation of the external world This is under four headings:
1.The formation of the external world and its dimensions
2.A general presentation of the inhabitants of this world
3.The gola circling Mount Meru above the Earth 4.Resolving any contradictions between the presentation of the world in the Kālacakra and that of the Abhidharma texts The Formation of the External World and Its Dimensions WHEN A WORLD UNDERGOES destruction, there follows a time of emptiness. During this time the earth element is possessed of five qualities, namely smell, form, taste, tangibility, and sound.
The water element has the above qualities, minus that of smell. The fire element has the above qualities, minus smell and form.
The air element has the two qualities of tangibility and sound, while the space element possesses only the quality of sound. During this time of emptiness the subtle particles of these five elements exist as isolated fragments and are not in any conventional sense objects of the sensory powers of the eye and so forth. They are known as empty particles and remain isolated in empty space.
When the potential of the collective karma of sentient beings is ripened, the subtle air particles come together to form air whose nature is light and moving.
It is said that by this process we can come to know of extremely subtle and hidden airs.
Similarly the subtle fire particles come together to become forms of fire, such as lightning possessed of air.
The subtle water particles also amass to become forms of water, such as rain possessed of air and fire.
The earth particles amass to become forms of earth, such as a rainbow possessed of air, fire, and water.
The particles of the “taste” or space element pervade the other four source elements.
This particular element of space is not unformed space but a formed space, whose presence separates forms from one another. These four elements gradually expand to form the four foundation mandalas — of air, fire, water, and earth — whose individual thicknesses are fifty thousand yojana and which are stacked as air surmounted by fire, water, and then earth. The manner in which they are stacked is akin to smaller measuring cups successively stacked into larger ones.
The upper surfaces of each mandala are similar in that the distance from the center of the earth mandala to its rim is fifty thousand yojana and likewise the exposed distance from the inner rim to the outer rim of the other three is also fifty thousand yojana.
The thickness of each mandala is also fifty thousand yojana. The distance from rim to rim of the earth mandala is one hundred thousand yojana. The diameter of the water mandala is two hundred thousand yojana, that of the fire mandala three hundred thousand yojana, and that of the air mandala four hundred thousand yojana.
After the four mandalas have formed, winds that support, churn up, and shape, bring about the formation of Meru, the other mountains, and the continents.
Standing in the center of the earth mandala, Meru rises to a height of one hundred thousand yojana.
Above its summit, in empty space and in the aspect of “mental form,” are Meru’s so-called neck, face, and crown.
The height of the neck is twenty-five thousand yojana, the face fifty thousand yojana, and the crown twenty-five thousand yojana, making a distance of one hundred thousand yojana from the base of the throat to the top of the crown. Therefore the base of Meru to the top of the crown is two hundred thousand yojana.
The distance from the center of the earth mandala on which Meru stands to any of the four cardinal points of the base of Meru, such as the eastern edge for example, is eight thousand yojana.
Therefore, at its base, Meru is sixteen thousand yojana across. Surrounding Meru is a circular area extending outward for a distance of a thousand yojana. Beyond this circular area is an area stretching out to the edge of the Śīta Mountains for a distance of sixteen thousand yojana. This distance is the limit of the overhang of the summit of Meru.5 This particular area on the earth-mandala surface is divided into eighteen regions. Six continents, six seas, and six mountain ranges make up these regions.
From the inner to the outer, the six continents are Candra, Sitābha, Kuśa, Kiṃnara, Krauñca, and Rudra.
The six seas, from the inner to the outer, are known as Honey, Butter, Curd, Milk, Water, and Wine.
The six mountain ranges, from the inner to the outer, are known as Nīlābha, Mandara, Niṣaṭha, Maṇikara, Droṇa, and Śīta. The continent of Candra borders the terraces or immediate environs of Meru.
Bordering the continent is the Honey Sea, and bordering the sea are the Nīlābha Mountains.
Likewise, the other continents, seas, and mountains are similarly arranged.
The five inner mountains are of the same height as the Śīta Mountains, and all six continents, seas, and mountains are of the same width. From the inner edge of the continent of Candra to the outer edge of the Śīta Mountains is a distance of sixteen thousand yojana.
As there are six mountain ranges, six continents, and six seas, this distance is to be divided by eighteen. This gives a figure of 888 yojana, three krośa, 1111 armspans, and ten fingerwidths. That is the width of each mountain range, continent, and sea. From the outer limit of the Śīta Mountains to the inner rim of the water mandala is a distance of twenty-five thousand yojana. This area of the earth mandala is the seventh continent known as Greater Jambudvīpa, the realm of karma.
Directionally from Meru it is divided into twelve parts, known as the twelve sectors or continents.6 Outside of this, on the water mandala, is the seventh sea known as the Salt Ocean. Outside of this sea and on the fire mandala is the seventh mountain range, known as the Vajra Mountains, and the Fire of the Wild Mare’s Face.7
The area of the twelve sectors stretches from the Śīta Mountains to the water mandala for a distance of twenty-five thousand yojana. Its 12,500-yojana inner half is divided into six regions.
In Lesser Jambudvīpa these are the lands of Himālaya, Kailash, China, Khotan, Tibet, and India.
Regions of similar size also exist on the other eleven sectors.
The mountains, continents, seas, and so forth that stretch out from the terraces or environs of Meru as far as the air mandala are in the forms of discs encircling Meru. Each is bound by a circumference that is three times its diameter.8 Therefore, three times the 400,000-yojana diameter of the air mandala is 1,200,000 yojana. This is the circumference of the air mandala. Three times the 300,000-yojana diameter fire mandala is 900,000 yojana. By using the same calculations for the other mandalas, the circumference of each can be known.
Between the air mandala and the crown of Meru are found the thirty-one existences. In the lower half of the 50,000-yojana-deep air mandala are the Vajra Flames hell and the Crying hell.
In the upper half lies the Great Darkness hell. The air mandala, therefore, is home to three hell realms.
Similarly, in the lower half of the fire mandala is found the Fire hell, and in the upper half is the Endless Smoke hell.
These are hot hells, and they each plunge to a depth of twenty-five thousand yojana.
Within the water mandala, the lower half contains the Swamps hell while the upper makes up the Sandy Water hell.
These two are cold hells and also fall to a depth of twenty-five thousand yojana.
The lower half of the earth mandala contains the Gravel Water hell.
The upper half is the home of the asuras and the nāgas. Both these realms are twenty-five thousand yojana from top to bottom, while their widths are coterminus with the earth mandala itself.
The twelve sectors can be home for any of the realms of humans, animals, and ghosts. This tantra and its commentaries do not speak of any special abodes for animals and ghosts.
Greater Jambudvīpa on the earth mandala is known as the realm of karma, while the six inner continents are known as realms of enjoyment. The Great Commentary says:
“The thousands of yojana upon the earth are of mountains, nāgas, planets, and directions.” This means that the size in yojana of these four mandalas of earth are “mountains,” meaning seven thousand, “nāgas,” meaning eight thousand, “planets,” meaning nine thousand, and “directions,” meaning ten thousand.9
“The air in the east is very round.” This means that a characteristic of the air mandala in the east is that it is very round, having the shape of the full moon.10 There are many ways of explaining the meaning of these and other passages, but the correct way is as follows. East, south, north, and west are respectively the realms of  air, fire, water, and earth. Because of this correspondence, the diameter of the eastern continent of Pūrvavideha is about seven thousand yojana, and its shape is circular like the full moon. 11 The central mass of the southern continent of Lesser Jambudvīpa has a size of about eight thousand yojana and is triangular in shape.
The central mass of the northern continent of Uttarakuru is about nine thousand yojana and is the shape of a half moon. The central mass of the western continent of Aparagodānīya is about ten thousand yojana and is square-shaped.
These shapes refer to their outline shapes and not to their shapes protruding from the earth.
Concerning the gods of the desire realm, the Great Commentary says that “On Meru the gatherings of Indra, Brahmā, and so forth,”12 thereby merely indicating the abodes of some of the gods of the desire realm, but these are not taught definitively.
However Indra, king of the gods, and his retinue must live on Meru, and gods of the desire realm in their entirety must be posited as being spread throughout Meru and the lower third of the throat of Meru.
Therefore it must be that of the six realms of the gods of desire, the four known as Using at Will Creations of Others, Magical Creations at Will, Joyful, and Free of Conflict are stacked upon the lower third of the throat of Meru.
How high is each of these four realms?
A third of the 25,000-yojana throat of Meru divided by four is 2,083 yojana, one krośa, 666 armspans, two cubits, one finger and thumbspan, and four fingerwidths.
What is the color and shape of Meru, home of some of the gods of desire?
In the Gnosis chapter it says:
This emperor of mountains, on the east is pure indranīla,
on the south ruby, the west is yellow, the north, like the moon, is white crystal,
the center is green.13 As this quote indicates, the center, east, south, west, and north are green, blue, red, yellow, and white respectively.
The shape of Meru is circular, and it has five horns that are slender at the base but with large tips.
There are many differing assertions about these horns, but I will write of something approaching the truth.
The four lower circular horns girdle Meru like belts. The lowest horn hangs down like a platform as far as the outer rim of the immediate environs. The distance from the girdle of this lower horn to the peak of Meru is divided into four equal parts, and from the cusp of each of the first three parts a horn arches down.
The girdling of these horns becomes progressively larger, like small bowls mounted by successively larger bowls.
The topmost horn is at the level of the summit of Meru, spreading out into all directions and reaching down to touch the peaks of the Śīta Mountains.
Included within the covering of the four upper horns are the six continents, six seas, and five mountain ranges. The diameter across the summit of Meru is fifty thousand yojana.
In the Great Commentary it says: The size of the upper surface of Meru is fifty thousand between the east and west, north and south.14 Above, five points15 reach out to the surfaces and in all directions to the environs also.
“Outside of that the continents, mountains,” means that outside the environs of Meru, within the covering of the four tips, are the six continents.16 These quotes also explain the point well. The throat of Meru, from the top of its lower third to the upper limit of the throat, is divided into four parts. These are known as the realms of the white eon and are the form realms Sphere of Brahmā, Chanting in the Presence of Brahmā, Great Realm of Brahmā, and Little Light.
Similarly the 50,000-yojana face of Meru is divided into three parts, and each part is 16,666 yojana, two krośa, 1,333 armspans, one cubit, and eight fingerwidths. These three parts are known as the chin, nose, and forehead of Meru. The bottom of the chin to the nose is divided into four parts. These four are known as the glorious eon and comprise the form realms Limitless Light, Illuminating Light, Little Virtue, and Limitless Virtue. The lower limit of  the nose to the lower limit of the forehead, known as beyond the world of Brahmā, is in four parts comprising the realms Vast Virtue, Without Cloud, Creation of Merit, and Great Fruition.
Similarly the area from the lower limit of the forehead to the base of the crown is divided into four parts known as the eon of Brahmā, comprising the realms Lesser, Untroubled, Farsighted, and None Higher. The base of the crown to its tip is also divided into four parts. These are known as the eon of pure dharma and comprise the formless realms, namely Source of Limitless Space, Source of Limitless Consciousness, Source of Nothingness, and Source of No Recognition Yet No Nonrecognition. On the formless realms the Great Commentary says: “Pure dharma” refers to the formless existence.
“Eon” refers to the length of time the gods remain there.17
The form realms can be understood similarly. Each of the formless realms, therefore, measures 6,250 yojana from top to bottom. Each of the sixteen form realms, from its upper to its lower limit, measures 4,166 yojana, two krośa, 1,333 armspans, one cubit, and eight fingerwidths.
If the four formless realms are actually positioned above the form realm of None Higher, and if these four are also arranged above and below each other, then migration from an existence such as the desire realm to the formless realm would require a bardo existence.
This is because, between the state of death in the desire realm and the taking of birth in realms above None Higher, which begin at 175,000 yojana above the earth, there must be a continuation between death in one state and birth in another in the form of an intermediate state, “like the growth of corn.”18 However this cannot be accepted.
The Abhidharma teachings and commentaries state that birth in the formless realms requires no bardo.
So what is the thinking behind the statement that the four formless realms are positioned above the form realm of None Higher and are also arranged on top of one another?
These doubts do occur.
However I will write a little in order to dispel them.
“The formless is at the place of death.”19 This quote from the Abhidhamakośa explains that when migrating from the two lower realms to the formless realms, rebirth occurs at the very place of death. Therefore, to take birth in the formless realm, an intermediate continuum of a bardo between the state of birth and the previous death state is not necessary. Because of this the Abhidharma teachings say that for birth in the formless realms, there is no bardo. It is true that if the formless realms were actually above the realm of None Higher and were stacked on top of one another, then taking birth in a formless realm would necessarily require a bardo existence.
However the reason for the assertion in this tantra and its commentaries that the four formless realms are above None Higher and are stacked on top of each other is that, just as there are levels of birth for the sentient beings of the three realms, so there are levels of birthplaces. On that basis to say, “I will attain this level” is to give these realms their own measurable status by positing them in space above the form realms, which is then used for the practice of outer and inner correspondence.
However, in actuality, and as it is stated in the Abhidharmakośa, four formless realms divided into higher and lower and positioned above and beyond None Higher are not accepted.
There is, however, an alternative explanation.
The teachings of the Abhidharma and so forth, which state that birth in the formless realms has no preceding intermediate state, rest upon the premise that a being of the formless realm is without form.
As it says, “Because there is no form, there is formlessness.”20 Therefore, in the thinking of the Perfection Vehicle, sentient beings of the formless realms are without form.
However the position of highest tantra is that beings of the formless realms do have form, because according to the tantras and commentaries of Guhyasamāja and others, every sentient being possesses the very subtle mind and the very subtle wind. Moreover, this subtle wind is explained as being of five-colored light rays. Therefore, not only do beings of the formless realms possess the aggregate of form, they also possess source forms such as blue, yellow, and so forth. Moreover, in the Kālacakra Tantra and its commentaries,  it is explained that these beings also possess the subtle particles of the five elements. In the Gnosis chapter, in the Supreme and Unchanging Gnosis summary, it says:
The bodies of those of the formless realms are of the element of emptiness, as mere potentials within the mind and of the quality of sound.21 This says that the bodies of formless beings possess sound alone as their primary quality and are of the nature of the space element. The quote continues :
Moreover fluid is without earth, water, fire, air, smell, form, taste, and tangibility.22 This states that the fluid of beings of the formless realms does not possess in primary form the elements of earth, water, fire, and air, as well as the four element-derived forms. The quote continues:
The primary qualities of these four, earth and so forth, exist as mere general qualities. Without a collection of qualities, the potentialities of samsara would not arise from one quality alone.23 This explains that earth, water, fire, and air together with their qualities of form and so forth are present in the fluid drop of formless beings as qualities in general form only.
This means that the four elements, their sense forms, and the subtle particle of fluid are to be understood as being in minuscule form. Also, in the explanations of tantras such as the Guhyasamāja, the indestructible red and white elements of the very subtle mind and wind exist together as a single unit, which has been present in the mindstreams of all beings without a moment of interruption since beginningless time.
“Indestructible” means nothing can destroy it.
Therefore, although beings of formless realms are said to be without form by the sutra tradition, it is the position of this tantra, the Great Commentary, as well as other highest tantras, that they do possess form.
Similarly it is correct to accept as literal the statement that the four formless realms are above None Higher and are stacked one on top of another.
Otherwise I would have to wonder how it could not be contradictory to accept as literal the other glaring differences with the Abhidharma tradition, such as the general size and shape of the world as being four hundred thousand yojana, the length of time spent in the hells, and so on.
Which of the two above explanations is the more valid is something to be examined.
Having explained in detail the size, divisions, and so forth of our four-continent world realm, a little of the situation outside of that world will be explained. The Great Commentary says: “Outside of that, only emptiness, no three worlds, no qualities, lacking all these.” This means that outside the air mandala, at the bottom and the crown at the top, is only emptiness. This emptiness is solely an entity of individual particles of the five elements.24
Therefore, below the lower limit of the air mandala and above the upper limit of the crown, the subtle particles of the five elements of earth and so forth exist as individual and disconnected particles undetectable to the senses of ordinary beings. This is known as mere emptiness and appears as empty space.
On the strength of this explanation, we can understand that beyond this four-continent world in the eight directions also lies the empty space of the disconnected particles of the five elements known as total emptiness.
(Some scholars maintain the size of this emptiness of unconnected particles outside this world realm to be a hundred thousand yojana.
They base this measurement on the Gnosis chapter, where it mentions the size of the world to be five hundred thousand yojana.
They assert that the purpose is to include the one-cubit part of the body not grasped by consciousness, such as the nails and hair, as part of the basis of purification.) Existence outside of this total emptiness of disconnected and individual particles is spoken of in the Gnosis chapter in the Supreme and Unchanging Gnosis summary:
“One thousand” means that above and below the center of this saha25 world realm are a thousand each.
As above and below, so it is in the east, west, north, south, the unreal, the powerful, the air, and fire.26 It is the same with the two and three thousand.
Therefore, the great thousand refers to these countless world realms.27 Therefore, with this saha world of ours as the center, there are a thousand four-continent worlds in each of the ten directions, and these worlds make up the thousand-world realm.
Two thousand worlds at each of the ten directions, including the worlds of the thousand-world realm, make up the two thousand, or intermediate, world realm.
Three thousand worlds at each of the ten directions, including the previous world realms, make up the three-thousand-world realm.
The great thousand-world realm includes all these worlds and encompasses countless world realms.
Therefore, although there are those 28 who state that the Kālacakra Tantra and its commentaries omit mention of the three thousands, they have not investigated this. It is said that a world realm is four hundred thousand yojana across.
But what is the length of a yojana?
In the Condensed Tantra it says:
Eight most subtle make one subtle. Eight of the subtle make up the fine tip of a hair.29 Therefore, according to this and further quotes, the ultimate diminution of form is the very subtle particle, and eight of them strung together is the linear measurement of one subtle particle.
A string of eight subtle particles is the width of a hair at its tip.
Eight hairbreadths are one black mustard seed, eight mustard seeds are one louse, eight lice make one barley grain, and eight such grains are one fingerwidth.
Twenty-four fingerwidths are one cubit, four cubits are one armspan, two thousand armspans are one krośa, and four krośa make one yojana.30
This tantra and its commentaries do not deal a lot with other worlds but concentrate on the presentation of the dimensions of this world. The reason for this is spoken of in the Great Commentary: And so, with omniscient knowledge, in order to ripen the ṛṣi, the Conqueror spoke of the dimensions of the world and the dimensions of the body for the purpose of the mandala.31 The reasons, therefore, are firstly to bring about correspondence between the inner world of the practitioner’s body and the outer world, which form the two bases for purification in the deity mandala meditation, and secondly to bring about correspondence between these two bases of purification and the mandala itself, which is the actual purifier.
The dimensions of the outer world, therefore, are given to correspond with the dimensions of the body. From the lower limit that is the base of the air mandala to the tip of the crown of Meru is a distance of four hundred thousand yojana.
This corresponds to the distance of four cubits from the soles of the feet to the crown of the head of a person.
The distance across the air mandala from rim to rim is four hundred thousand yojana.
This corresponds to the distance of four cubits between the fingertips of the right hand and the fingertips of the left.
From the lower limit of the air mandala to the base of Meru is a distance of two hundred thousand yojana, corresponding to the two-cubit distance between the soles of the feet and the hips.
The lower limit of the air mandala to the base of Meru is divided into seven hell locations32 and one nāga realm, each realm occupying a quarter of a hundred thousand, or twenty-five thousand, yojana. This corresponds to the distance of two cubits between the hips and the soles of the feet, which is divided into eight sections, each section being a quarter of a cubit or six fingerwidths.
Meru itself is one hundred thousand yojana. This corresponds to the spine, which stretches the distance of one cubit from the hips to the base of the throat.
The four desire realms, Free of Conflict and so forth, and the first four form realms of Sphere of Brahmā and so forth stretch for twenty-five thousand yojana up the throat of Meru. This corresponds to the measurement of the throat, which is a quarter of a cubit or six fingerwidths. From Limitless Light to None Higher upon the face of Meru is a distance of half of one hundred thousand yojana, corresponding to the distance of half a cubit, or twelve fingerwidths, from the base of the chin to the upper limit of the forehead.
The span of the formless realms from the base of the crown of Meru to its tip is a quarter of one hundred thousand yojana, which corresponds to the distance of a quarter cubit, or six fingerwidths, from the hairline to crown of the head.
The reason that these higher god realms are called the throat, face, and  crown of Meru is to match them with the corresponding parts of the body. The distance from the center of Meru to the righthand outer rim of the earth mandala is half of one hundred thousand, or fifty thousand, yojana. This corresponds to the measurement of half a cubit, or twelve fingerwidths, from the center of the chest to the edge of the right shoulder.
The thickness of the water mandala on the right of Meru is half one hundred thousand, or fifty thousand, yojana. This corresponds to the half cubit, or twelve-fingerwidth, length of the right upper arm. Similarly the thickness of the fire mandala on the right side of Meru is fifty thousand yojana, corresponding to the half cubit, or twelve fingerwidth, length of the right forearm from the wrist to the elbow.
The thickness of the air mandala on the right of Meru is half one hundred thousand, or fifty thousand, yojana. This corresponds to the half-cubit distance from the wrist to the fingertips of the right hand. The same correspondence can be applied to the left side of Meru and the left side of the body. The Inhabitants of This World A general presentation of the inhabitants of this world This is under three headings:
1.The kinds of sentient beings 2.Their life spans 3.Causes for their birth
The kinds of sentient beings The Condensed Tantra says: The thirty-one existences combine into three.33 The thirty-one existences are: asuras, humans, animals, ghosts, hells, the  six celestial desire realms, comprising Realm of the Four Great Monarchs, Heaven of Thirty-Three, Free of Conflict, Joyful, Magical Creations at Will, and Using at Will Creations of Others.
These make up the eleven desire realms.
The sixteen gods of the form realms are those of Sphere of Brahmā, Chanting in the Presence of Brahmā, Great Realm of Brahmā, Little Light, Limitless Light, Illuminating Light, Little Virtue, Limitless Virtue, Vast Virtue, Without Cloud, Creation of Merit, Great Fruition, The Lesser, Untroubled, The Farsighted, and None Higher.
The formless realms are made up of Source of Limitless Space, Source of Limitless Consciousness, Source of Nothingness, and Source of No Recognition Yet No Nonrecognition.
These thirty-one can be condensed into the three existences of desire, form, and formless, the three realms of desire, form, and formless, or to the three levels below, on, and above the earth. Their life spans This is under five headings:
1.Life span of hell beings and nāgas
2.Life span of the desire realm gods
3.Life span of the form realm gods
4.Life span of the formless realm gods
5.Resolving doubts concerning life spans within other realms Life span of hell beings and nāgas The life span of beings in the hell of Gravel Water and of the nāgas is one short eon.
The life span for the second and third hells known, as Sandy Water and Swamps, is one intermediate eon.
Beings of the hell of Endless Smoke and the hell of Fire have a life span of one supreme eon, while those in the sixth and seventh hells, known as the hell of Great Darkness and the hell of Crying, live a life of one great eon. The life span of the eighth hell, called Vajra Flame, is for as long as the world realm exists. Life span of the desire realm gods These six realms from the Four Great Monarchs to Using at Will the Creations of Others enjoy life spans ranging from one short eon to six short eons respectively. Life span of the form realm gods
The life span of the sixteen realms from Sphere of Brahmā to None Higher are spoken of in the Great Commentary: Therefore the sixteen eons of the form realms range from sixteen eons to one eon.34 Life span ranges from one eon for Sphere of Brahmā to sixteen for None Higher.
These eons are not short eons, because the life span of Using at Will the Creations of Others is explained as being six short eons, and Sphere of Brahmā must have a longer life span than Using at Will the Creation of Others.
They cannot be great eons either, because beings of None Higher have been explained as having a life span of sixteen eons, whereas the Peak of Existence35 has been explained as enjoying a life span of four great eons, and the Peak of Existence must have a longer life span that None Higher.
Therefore, although it is not stated which of the four kinds of eons these eons refer to, it must be either intermediate or supreme eons.
My opinion is that the eons used to measure the life spans of the four ārya abodes from the Lesser to None Higher must be supreme eons, and those used to measure the life spans of the other form realms must be intermediate eons.
But aren’t the terms “supreme eon” and “great eon” synonyms? Where is it taught that they are different?
That these two are different is clearly stated in the Great Commentary:
The first world of nāgas and the first realm of hell, by the power of virtue and evil respectively, have life spans of one short eon.
The second and third hell both have life spans of an intermediate eon.
In the fourth and fifth hells the life spans are of one supreme eon.
In the sixth and seventh life is for one great eon.36 This quotes talks of eons as being small, intermediate, supreme, and great, which indicates that a supreme eon is longer than an intermediate eon and shorter than a great eon. Life span of the formless realm gods Beginning with the lowest, the life span is one, two, three, and four great eons respectively. Resolving doubts concerning life spans within other realms
But what are the life spans of humans, animals, and ghosts?
In this section on the life spans of gods and so forth, the tantra is not clear on this question.
However, when explaining how the very subtle breath is used for calculating the length of days, the Great Commentary says:
“Subtle” means that one inhalation and one exhalation of a human breath divided into six hundred more than 21,000 is one subtle breath.37 This and further quotes reveal the answers to this question.
This is because one breath of a human is divided into 21,600 parts. One such part is the length of one breath of a fully formed insect. 21,600 of such insect breaths is one of its days, thirty of such days are a month, twelve such months are one year, and one hundred of its years is the life span of a tiny insect.
Similarly thirty human breaths are equal to one breath of a ghost, and 21,600 of such breaths is one ghost day. Thirty of its days are a month, twelve months are a year, and one hundred of its years is the life span of a ghost. One human day is the length of one asura breath.
21,600 such breaths are one asura day, thirty days one month, twelve months one year, and one hundred such years the life span of the asura.
21,600 human breaths make up one human day, and one hundred human years is the human life span.
Generally these life spans are those of a complete life and depict maximum life span, but they are not fixed.
The Great Commentary says:
Likewise 777,600,000 breaths are one hundred days38 and one hundred years.
Depending on karma, this complete life span could be more or could be less.
For the yogis, by the power of their yoga and by the power of the meditative concentration of their asceticism, it will be more, and one breath will become hours. For those of nonvirtue,  by the force of their nonvirtue, it will become less.39
One human year is equal to one breath of the śakti40 of None Higher, and the 21,600 human years, which is the length of Rudracakrī’s establishment of the four ages in the twelve sectors, are equal to one breath of those in the formless realm Source of No Recognition Yet No Nonrecognition, who are referred to here by the name prakṛti.
If that is so, it may be assumed that 21,600 of such breaths equal one day in each of these realms and so on, thereby arriving, as in previous examples, at the hundred-year life span of None Higher and Peak of Existence.
This, however, is not the case.
In the Condensed Tantra it says:
21,600 subtle breaths, breaths, dhru,41 hours,42 solar days,43dhru,44 and the four ages45 are, respectively, one day in the life of a small body,
humans, ghostly spirits, gods, asura, śakti, and the prakṛti.
On Earth the four ages are the measurements of the śakti.46
The breath measurements in None Higher and Peak of Existence and the corresponding length of the days and so forth are explained alongside the life spans of small insects, humans, ghosts, and asuras, but they are not there for the purpose of explaining the life span in None Higher and Peak of Existence.
The lives of the gods of None Higher, Peak of Existence, and the desire realm are far longer than a hundred of their own years, as has been previously explained.
In the Great Commentary it says:
From these measurements, the measurements of the śakti, which are the measurements of the gods of None Higher, correspond to the four ages of Rudracakrī on the earth.47 The measurements of a breath and a day in None Higher are taught in order to know the length of the four ages of Rudracakrī and therefore are mentioned here for a different purpose. The life spans of the hells and other realms are measured in different types of eons. But how long are these eons?
The Great Commentary says:
Concerning the divisions of a short eon, a pit one yojana wide and one deep is completely filled with tiny tips of hair. In a hundred years a hair tip is taken out. The time taken for the pit to be emptied is one day of one short eon. Thirty of those days are a month, twelve of those months are a year, and one hundred years is said to be one eon.
Likewise, a group of those eons is one intermediate eon, and a group of those is one supreme eon.48
Therefore a four-sided pit with length, width, and depth of one yojana is filled with round tips of hair. Every one hundred years one hair is removed until there are no more. The time taken for the pit to be emptied is one day of one short eon. 360 of those days make a year, and one hundred such years is the measurement of one short eon. A group of such eons forms one intermediate eon, and a group of intermediate eons forms one supreme eon.
A group of supreme eons makes up one great eon. But what amount of hair is in this pit, and how many human years make up a short eon?
That, too, can be explained. The number of hairwidths lined up to make one yojana has been expressed as follows:
Space, emptiness, space, nāga, eyes,
mountain, sense organ, mind, and fire.
This number multiplied by itself will give the number of hairs making up a single hairwidth layer of hair in the pit. This is expressed as:50
Space, space, drop, emptiness, space, drop, veda, nāga,
opening, opening, ocean, time, ocean,
space, time, arrows, opening, nāga, and opening.51
This figure multiplied by “emptiness, space, space, nāga, eyes, mountain, sense organ, mind and fire” will give the total number of hairs in the pit when it is full.
This is expressed as:
From the position of nine drops,
eyes, arrows, fire, nāga, taste, nāga, ocean,
nāga, fire, conqueror, taste, and space,
nāga, nāga, nāga, sun, moon, fire.52
This is the number of hairs, which multiplied by a hundred gives the number of human years that make up one day of a short eon. This is expressed as: From the position of eleven drops,
eyes, arrows, fire, nāga, taste, nāga, ocean,
nāga, fire, conqueror, taste, and space,
nāga, nāga, nāga, sun, moon, fire.
This figure multiplied by 360 gives, in human years, the length of one year of a short eon, and one hundred short-eon years is the length of one short eon.
(This, in human years, is expressed as:
Fourteen drops, eyes, mountain, taste,
space, taste, eyes, sense organs, elements, nāga, mountain,
mountain, ocean, eyes, space, mighty one, opening,
fire, taste, space, sun, and form
are the human years of a short eon.
Expressed as numerals this becomes two mahāprasuta, seven kaṃkara, six mahākaṃkara, six mahābimbara, two akṣobhya, five mahākṣobhya, five vivā, eight mahāvivā, seven utsaṃgah, seven mahotsaṃgah, four vāhana, two mahāvāhana, seven mahātiṭibha, nine hetu, three mahāhetu, six karabha, two indra, one samāpta, and one mahāsamāpta.)53
If that is the length of a short eon, then how is an intermediate eon formed from a “group”54 of short eons.
There are two schools of thought on this.
According to the new Jonang translation and the Shong55 translation as quoted above, “Likewise, a group of those eons is one intermediate eon, and a group of those is one supreme eon.” Here group means a mathematical grouping, and in the fourth summary of the Gnosis chapter it says “a two group is four” and “a three group is nine,” and so on, until “a nine group is eighty-one and a ten group is one hundred.”56 Therefore each number is multiplied by itself to form a “group.” In this way the hundred years of a short eon is multiplied by a hundred to make ten thousand short-eon years.
This is the length of an intermediate eon.
These ten thousand years are multiplied by ten thousand to make a hundred million.
This is the number of short-eon years in a supreme eon.
That one hundred million multiplied by one hundred million gives, in short-eon years and by using another numeration system, the seventeenth numeric unit57 or mahākaṃkara. This is the length of one great eon. Concerning the second school of thought, in many translations it says: Similarly, to replicate using the measurements of that category is to arrive at the length of an intermediate eon.
Similarly, to replicate using the measurements of an intermediate eon is to arrive at the length of a supreme eon. The Ra translations also state: A multiplication of that group will form an intermediate eon.
A multiplication of a group of intermediate eons will form a supreme eon.
In this way of thinking, every hundred short-eon years a single hair is pulled from a pit filled with hairs as previously detailed, until the pit is emptied.
This would be the length of one day of an intermediate eon.
One hundred years of such intermediate-eon days would make up the duration of one intermediate eon. If every hundred intermediate-eon years one hair was pulled from the pit, one day of a supreme eon would have passed. A hundred such years is the duration of a supreme eon. This is spoken of in the commentary Illuminating Reality. If these measurements of eons are to be understood by using systems of enumeration, then what are the numerical units?
Such knowledge will be necessary in other contexts and so will be explained.
There are two traditions of enumeration.
The first is from the Abhidharma commentaries and is explained by the scholar Śāntipa58 in his Commentary on the Compendium of Sūtra. In it he says:
The different names of the numbers are taught in the Abhidharma.
Numerical units are solitary and coupled.
Solitary numerical units are, eka, daśa, śatam, sahasram, prabhedaṃ, lakṣam, atilakṣam, koṭī, madhya.59 These are the nine solitary numerical units.
There are three divisions of coupled numerical units.
They are ayuta, nayuta, prasuta, kaṃkara, bimbara, akṣobhya, vivā, utsaṃgah, and vāhana.
These nine together with their nine “greater” units make up the first division of coupled units.
Tiṭibha, hetu, karabha, indra, samāpta, gati, nimbaraja, mudrā, and balaṃ, together with their “greater” units make up the nine numerical units of the second division of coupled units.
Saṃjñā, vibhūta, and balākṣaṃ make up, together with their respective “greater” units, the third division of coupled units.
Therefore, the nine solitary and the forty-two numerical units that make up the three divisions of the coupled units together total fifty-one. These appear in the Abhidharma.
The remaining eight numerical units do not appear in the text.
However adding them to the category of coupled units makes fifty-nine.
These fifty-nine have been given the name “numbers.” The sixtieth is said to be apart from these names and is known as asaṃkhyāṃ. This has been taught by the master Vasubandhu.60
As this quote explains, there are sixty numerical units.
Each unit has its own name, and the sixtieth is known as asaṃkhyāṃ.61 Moreover each coupled unit consists of the unit and its greater unit, as in ayuta and mahāyutah, for example.
This doubling up is repeated for the others.
The second tradition is that taken from the sutras62  and is also explained by the scholar Śāntipa in his Commentary on the Compendium of Sutra.
In it he says:
The names of the divisions of numerical units are spoken of in the sutras:
“Numerical units are of two kinds, coupled and solitary.
Of the solitary there are 116.
They are jewa , khökhö , thegu , traktrik , thamtham , nyangnying , gangyang , bendün , charchur , chakchik , jangjing , tsemtsem , chalchöl , chüchü
, serser , tribtrib , yangang , choma , tramtrim , napnup , sangsang , gyüyé , tangyé , trayar , sayé , mitsung , lamlum , yamyom , traltrül , thethü
, samchö , drangdring , droyé , ngoyé , sangyak , tromgye , tsechö , yongten , drukyö , sangyal , thingyuk , yicho , napnep , triktham , yalyal , drangyé , thukyal , shangshang , yakyak , thamthim , lomnyal , shalchö , shalyal , shalmé , shalkhor , shalthim , garshal , shalsang , shalthak , shalphül , shalshi , chogyur , nyarnyer , chakchik , salsül , salsal , gyodek , phenphün , nangyé , rimdröl , dzigü
, dzitül , phünyöl , ngéngé , drangtsi , sabdrang , gakyang , shungdül , trukché , ölchö , dapyé , chayé , dranglé , jimcho , yamé , nyalyé , taptep , benché , phangphung , kheutsang , shungsung , chokyöl , thatül , yüngyang , bünlop , lamlom , nyeyé , langling , japjip , mitsal , jamyé , ngadrang , möyé , trachal , logyé , bumdip , gamgum , lalo , and drangchö .
On to these are added the seven root numerical units to make 116.
These are the solitary units.
Of the coupled units there are ten.
They are, pakyé , yalchong , muyal , drangyöl , mijal , samchö , thayam , pakthak , jödu mepa , and jödu mepai yang jödu mepa .
Onto these ten are added replicated units from drangchö to jödu mepa to make twenty.
In total 136 units have been named.63
As this quote explains, the total of solitary and coupled units is 136.
The seven units referred to in the line “Onto these are added the seven root numerical units” are one, ten, hundred, thousand, ten thousand, hundred thousand, and million.
These seven are put at the beginning.
The units from one to lalo total 116 solitary units.64 There are ten units from drangchö to jödu mepa, and because they are coupled units, that becomes twenty.
These twenty added to the previous solitary units makes 136.
Therefore it seems that the text of the sutra should run, “… gamgum and lalo. Onto these are added the seven root numerical units… ”;
and “Of the coupled units there are ten. They are, drangchö, pakyé… ”.
Furthermore the coupled units would run from drangchö and drangchö replicated up to jödu mepa and jödu mepai yang jödu mepa.
Causes for their birth Great nonvirtuous actions create birth in hell, middling nonvirtuous actions result in birth as a ghost, while small nonvirtuous actions bring about birth as an animal.
Virtuous throwing karma together with the powerful completing karma of giving are causes for birth as an asura.65 Virtuous throwing karma alongside either virtuous or nonvirtuous completing karma results in birth as a human.
Virtuous throwing karma coupled with the completing karma of powerful acts of giving together with the force of mantra recitation results in birth as a god of the desire realm. Nonvirtuous throwing karma with virtuous completing karma will bring about birth in the world of nāgas.
Birth in any of the sixteen realms of form requires a meditative absorption66 vow that has discarded the ten nonvirtuous actions, plus throwing karma consisting of an individual preparatory meditative equipoise67 for each of the sixteen realms, and a completing karma in the form of the meditative equipoise of the actual absorption68 for each of the sixteen.
Similarly, for birth in the formless realms, the preparatory meditative equipoise for each realm becomes the throwing karma, and the actual absorption is the completing karma. However, if this is true, the Great Commentary says:
By the force of morality and by the meditative concentration of extinction by air69 and so forth, the sixteen form realms, such as None Higher, will come to be.70
This and further quotes explain that from the meditation of extinction by earth comes birth in the Sphere of Brahmā and the following three form realms. From the meditation of extinction by water arises birth in Limitless Light and the next three form realms. From the meditation of extinction by fire comes birth in Vast Virtue and the following three form realms. From the meditation of extinction by air comes birth in the Lesser and the following three form realms. And from the meditation of extinction by space arises the four formless realms.
Does this not contradict the previous explanation?
There is no contradiction here, for although extinction by earth and so forth are used as terminology for the causal meditative equipoises of the form and formless realms, it is not the thinking of the Great Commentary that the meditative equipoises of the ten extinctions,71 such as extinction by earth and so forth, are necessary causes for birth in the form and formless realms.
If this were the Great Commentary’s thinking, then it would mistakenly follow that it was also the Great Commentary’s thinking that birth in these two higher realms would necessarily entail entering the teachings of the Buddha and the paths of the Buddha, and that without casting aside non-Buddhist philosophy it would impossible to gain birth in these higher realms. How are the terms extinction by earth and so forth used for the causal meditative equipoise of the absorptions and the formless realms?
These can be described in sequence.
The throwing and completing meditative equipoises of the absorptions of the realms of Sphere of Brahmā, Chanting in the Presence of Brahmā, Great Realm of Brahmā, and  Little Virtue extinguish the desires found in lower levels. They are therefore known as extinctions. Because the element is earth, they are extinctions by earth.
Similarly the throwing and completing meditative equipoises for birth in Limitless Light, Illuminating Light, Little Virtue, and Limitless Virtue extinguish the desires found in their respective lower levels and are therefore extinctions.
The element is water, and they are therefore extinctions by water. The throwing and completing meditative equipoises for the four realms beginning with Vast Virtue, the four realms commencing with the Lesser, and for the four formless realms commencing with Source of Limitless Space also extinguish the desires of their respective lower levels and are known as extinctions. Because their elements are, respectively, fire, air, and space, they are therefore known as extinctions by fire, air, and space.
What is the purpose of referring to these preparatory meditative equipoises, or throwing karmas, and actual meditative equipoises, or completing karmas, not by their own names but as extinctions by earth and so forth?
There is a special purpose in this.
In Kālacakra thinking all phenomena are ascertained by their being in the nature of the five elements.
With this in mind the causal meditative equipoise absorptions that produce the sixteen form realms categorized in sets of four are to be understood as being primarily of the elements of earth, water, fire, and air, respectively, while the causal equipoises that produce the formless realms are to be understood as being of the element of space.
Furthermore the reason that these causal equipoises are not mentioned by name, but are taught using terms such as extinction by earth and so forth, is to make it clear that in order to migrate to the form and formless realms, the manifest desires lacking in each destination must first be extinguished.
The seed syllables that produce the thirty-one realms are mentioned in the Realms chapter:
The four formless are a and so forth, separate from the two of ha.72 i and so forth are the sixteen of form.
ha and so forth are clear as being the ten of desire together with the one consonant kṣa.
Therefore, the seeds of the formless realms are, a, ā, aṃ, and āḥ.
The seeds of the sixteen realms of form are, i, ī, e, ai, ṛ, ṛī, ar, ār, u, ū, o, au, ḷ, ḷī, al, āl.
The seeds of the six kinds of desire gods are, ha, hā, ya, yā, ra, rā.
The seeds of humans and asura are wa and wā.
The seeds of ghosts and animals are la and lā.
The seed of hell is kṣa. The Stars and the Planets The gola circling Mount Meru above the Earth This has three outlines: 1.Lunar mansions, houses, and the emergence of the planets
2.How the stars and planets orbit the skies
3.The gola of the earth:
Emergence of the seasons Lunar mansions, houses,73 and the emergence of the planets Understanding this topic depends on understanding the birth houses of the planets and so forth. Therefore this will be explained.
In the Gnosis chapter of the Great Commentary, in the fourth summary, it says:
Now the birth houses are spoken of as Aries and so forth.
The moon, Venus, and the sun arose in Aries, Gemini, and Cancer respectively.
Mars was born in Leo, Jupiter in Virgo, Rāhu in Libra, Mercury in Scorpio, Saturn at the beginning of Sagittarius, and Ketu in the last.74 Therefore, in the beginning, the lunar mansions, houses, and the other stars were formed. Then the sun was born in the beginning of the house of Cancer.
This marked the first actual year, and the sun became the ruler of the solar days.
The sun then moved counterclockwise, occupying the different lunar mansions, until it arrived at the beginning of the lunar mansion of aśvinī.
In aśvinī the sun arrived directly in line with the meridian of the central sector of the east, and there, simultaneously, the moon was born in aśvinī. Therefore it is explained that the moon was born in Aries.75 At the same time, the first lunar day began,76 the first light of the moon was born, and it was the beginning of that particular solar day. The moon became the ruler of that day, and the first karaṇa year77 began. Because of this, Aries is posited  as the first of the houses, aśvinī as the first of the lunar mansions, the waxing is posited as the first of the two halves of the month, and because the lunar mansion on the fifteenth day of that moon was citrā, the month of that name78 was posited as the first of the months.
From then on until Mars was born, the sun and the moon alternated in their rule over the days.
The sun then arrived at the beginning of the lunar mansion magha within Leo. In magha the sun arrived directly in line with the meridian of the central eastern sector. At the same time Mars was born in the lunar mansion magha and became ruler of that day. The following day was ruled by the sun, and until Mercury was born, the sun, moon, and Mars rotated their lordship over the days.
The sun continued in its counterclockwise occupation of the lunar mansions and arrived at the halfway point of the lunar mansion anurādha within Scorpio. There, in anurādha, it arrived directly in line with the meridian of the central eastern sector. Simultaneously Mercury was born in anurādha to become ruler of that day. The following day the sun ruled, and in this way, until Jupiter was born, these four planets79 rotated in their ruling of the days.
As it had done previously, the sun continued to occupy the lunar mansions until it arrived at the beginning of the lunar mansion hasta in Virgo. In hasta it arrived directly in line with the meridian of the central eastern sector. Simultaneously Jupiter was born in hasta and became ruler of the day on which it was born. The following day the sun ruled, and until the birth of Venus, these five ruled the days by rotation.
The sun then reached the beginning of the lunar mansion punarvasu in Gemini. Together with punarvasu the sun arrived directly in line with the center of the central eastern sector, and at the same time Venus was born in punarvasu, where it became ruler of the day in which it was born. The following day was ruled by the sun, and until Saturn was born, these six planets ruled, in order, successive days.
Likewise Saturn was born at the beginning of the lunar mansion mūla within Sagittarius. Therefore, when the sun together with mūla arrived directly in line with the center of the central eastern sector, Saturn was born, and the ensuing process was as described above.
The reason why the planets must have been born in this order is that, firstly, they could not have been born at the same time, because it is taught that they each had different birth houses and birth lunar mansions, and all seven alternating planets were born directly in line with the center of the central eastern sector.
They were, therefore, born successively. The order of the planets is taught as beginning with the sun and ending with Saturn.
This is the order of birth, and is not the order found in the explanations from the chapters on the Other Kālacakra or in the order of practice.
Furthermore the term alternating planets refers to their alternating lordship of successive days, which in turn is decided by order of planetary birth, hence the term alternating planets.
Moreover the birthplace of the planets is directly above the center of the central eastern sector, and it can be known that they were born while the sun was there also by the fact that the changeover time for the alternating planets directly at the center of the central eastern sector is at dawn from the standpoint of the direct center of the central southern sector.80 These planets are enemies to each to other. The Great Commentary says: Similarly, to clarify once more: “They fight with each other and are enemies.” This means that there are the peaceful and the wrathful.
Mercury and Maṅgala,81 Jupiter and Venus, Saturn and Ketu — these fight each other and are enemies.82 The houses of Aries and Scorpio are the dominion of Mars, and if Mercury occupies these houses when he is dwelling in them, Mars and Mercury will fight. Similarly Mercury has dominion over Gemini and Virgo, and if Mars enters while he dwells there, Mars and Mercury will fight.
The houses of Sagittarius and Pisces are the dominion of Jupiter, and if Venus enters while Jupiter is dwelling there,  then Venus and Jupiter will fight.
The dominions of Venus are the houses of Taurus and Libra, and if Jupiter should enter, these two planets will fight.
Saturn has dominion over Capricorn and Aquarius, and if Ketu enters, Saturn and Ketu83 will fight.
Moon’s dominion is Cancer, and when Saturn enters, the moon and Ketu combine to cause trouble for Saturn.
Similarly trouble not only occurs when an enemy enters the dominion of another. Should an enemy appear in the birth lunar mansion of another, then those two will fight.
This occurs when the planets gather as friends and enemies in each other’s birth lunar mansions.
In other houses and lunar mansions, mutual enemies will gather but will not fight. Concerning the way the planets orbit and occupy the twelve houses, all the stars, lunar mansions, and planets are themselves propelled by the power of the gola84 winds. This movement is known as gola wind movement and is solely a clockwise motion around Meru, at no time varying in its regularity. Concerning the individual movements of the planets, all planets except Rāhu and Kālāgni occupy the houses and lunar mansions in a counterclockwise motion by incremental steps.
Concerning how they occupy the houses and lunar mansions, the progressive early steps and regressive later steps of the slow stages of the five planets and the sun are decremental, and the regressive early steps and progressive later steps are incremental.85 When the five planets arrive in their own birth sign, all increment and decrement in the slow stages is canceled out.
The progressive early steps and the regressive later steps of the fast stages of the five planets are incremental, while the regressive early steps and progressive later steps are decremental.
When the step index is at zero, all increment and decrement in the fast steps are canceled out, and any of the five planets whose index is zero has disappeared into the sun and is conjunct with the sun. When any of the five planets gather at their individual birth signs conjunct  with the sun, any increment and decrement in both fast and slow stages is canceled out.
Therefore, within the period of time from the birth of a planet until it again becomes conjunct with the sun in its own birth sign can be found the imprint86 of its fixed or mean motion. Therefore fixed motion is the averaged-out planetary orbit through the complete circle of lunar mansions. The fixed motion of the three kinds of days for each of the planets is found by dividing a planetary orbit in terms of its three kinds of days among the 1,620 hours of the lunar mansions.87
The appearance and disappearance of the five planets is to be understood in terms of the sun, because a planet separate from the sun is visible to the eye, while a planet conjunct with the sun is not.
The Great Commentary says:
Now the text speaks of the appearance and disappearance of planets.
“Whatever planets dwell within the tenancy of the sun will definitely disappear.” By the rays of the sun it will not be seen, and is said to have disappeared.
However such a planet has not completely disappeared.88 “Abandoning the sun, it will rise.” By the power of its own movement, the planet that has set will leave the sun and rise, because it has left the rays of the sun.89 Similarly, when the peaceful planets Venus, Ketu, and Mercury set into the sun, they set from the left of the sun, and when they rise they do so also from the left.
The wrathful planets — Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn — rise and set from the right of the sun.
Similarly, when peaceful and wrathful planets meet, the wrathful will pass to the right of the peaceful, and the peaceful will pass to the left of the wrathful.
Rāhu was born in Libra in the lunar mansion of citrā while Kālāgni was born in the lunar mansion revatī, and from the time of their birth they occupy the houses or lunar mansions in clockwise motion.
The Rāhu head to his Kālāgni tail covers half the house and lunar-mansion circle in a counterclockwise direction.
The number of lunar mansions  and degree hours to appear in the chart of the body of Rāhu are counted backward from the lunar mansion revatī, while the numbers that appear in the charts of the head and tail are counted forward from the lunar mansion aśvinī.
The Condensed Tantra and the commentary talk in general terms about how Rāhu engages the moon at the times of full moon and no moon, but these are not discussed in depth.90 In order to understand how Rāhu engages with the sun and moon, it is important to know how Rāhu orbits.
The Great Commentary states:
“Moving to the left and not to the right.” This means that Rāhu moves to the left and not to the right, and that it grasps the moon from its left.
“To the right,” means moving to the right and grasping the moon from its right.91
This, and Rāhu’s self-orbiting around Meru and through the lunar mansions, is all the Great Commentary mentions on this topic, and it does not expound on any left and right movements.
These are explained by reference to the Root Tantra and to karaṇa astronomy.
The Great Commentary states:
Know that this is due to Rāhu’s orbits.
This is well known in all karaṇa systems, and therefore here the conqueror Mañjuśrī did not persist.92 The orbiting and so forth of Rāhu can be known from the Root Tantra and from the karaṇa works of others.93
Therefore Rāhu’s engagement with the sun and moon not occurring as calculated in the charts is due to the fault of not knowing precisely its orbiting habits.
Within its left and right orbiting, Rāhu has its northward and southward journeys.
The Great Commentary says:
In the circle of houses, every planet travels south and north.
The sun, for example, occupies the lunar mansions and the six houses.94 Therefore every planet has its northward and southward passages.
How the stars and planets orbit the skies This is under two outlines:
1.Examination of the assertions of others 2.Presentation of our own position
Examination of the assertions of others
The Great Commentary says:
“South from the center of the gola, the bow-shaped houses of time,95 dwelling in the fire mandala.” This means that from the center of the gola chart drawn at the time of equal day and night, the bow-shaped formation of six houses, half of the circle of stars, dwell in the south.
“In the north, the Śīta Mountains and, like fine lotus petals, Aries in the east, Libra, and so forth.” This means that just as in the south the six houses dwell within half the circle of stars, similarly, north from the center of the gola chart, there dwell, by division, six houses. “Aries in the east, Libra, and so forth” means that it stretches as far as Virgo. Similarly Libra and the others reach as far as Pisces.96 According to most scholars, the meaning of this passage from the Great Commentary, which incorporates citations from the Condensed Tantra, is the following. From here in the central southern sector on the morning of the spring equinox, the sun is in Aries above the skies of the eastern sector.
These skies are divided into northern and southern parts.
This division stretches across to the western sector, where the skies are also divided north and south. From this dividing line and above Meru, a chart is projected with the mind. In the northern part of the chart, in the eastern section97 of the east, is Aries. In the northeast is Taurus. The north is in two parts.
To the west of the north is Gemini, and in the half of the north to the east dwells Cancer. In the northwest is Leo. The west is also in two parts. In its western half lies Virgo. These are the six houses of the north.
Similarly, in the eastern half of the west is Libra.
In the southwest is Scorpio. The south is in two parts.
In the western part is Sagittarius and in the eastern part, Capricorn.
In the southeast is Aquarius, and in the western half of the east lies Pisces. The houses from the Libra to Pisces are the six houses of the south.
Furthermore, in this mentally constructed chart projected from the skies above Meru,  which is the midway point between the skies directly above the eastern sector and the skies directly above the western sector, the six northern houses from Aries to Virgo are said to be in the shape of fine lotus petals, and the six southern houses from the Libra to Pisces are said to be arranged in the shape of a bow.
This is explained as being the meaning of the phrases “like fine lotus petals” and “the bow-shaped houses of time,” as found in the tantra and its commentary.
This explanation is incorrect.
When the sun is in Aries directly above the central meridian of the central eastern sector on the morning of the spring equinox at the central meridian of the central southern sector, and the houses are arranged upon their paths over the twelve sectors, it is true that the six houses of the north are of the shape of lotus petals. However, in this depiction, the phrase “In the north, the Śīta Mountains” makes no sense. The formation of the six houses of the south are also not in the shape of a bow.
Some say that in the morning, the houses in the north are in the formation of lotus petals, while in the afternoon, the sun together with Aries will arrive at the center of the central western sector. At that time the six houses of the south are in the formation of a bow.
Therefore the thinking behind the passage from the tantra and commentary is that it should be applied to both the beginning and the end of the day.
However I cannot see this as being valid, because the statement from the Great Commentary that the six houses of the north are arranged as lotus petals and the six of the south are in the formation of a bow refers to an event happening at one particular time.
Furthermore, all those who follow the above traditions say that in the chart  that is projected in the skies above Meru from the eastern sector across to the western sector, the six houses arranged in the north of that chart are north of Meru, and the six houses placed in the south of the chart are south of Meru.
To posit this as the meaning of the commentary and tantra passage beginning “South from the center of the gola, the bow-shaped houses of time” is completely incorrect.
What the commentary is saying is that a circular gola chart of the twelve houses is to be bisected, and six houses placed in the northern section.
This depiction reaches the Śīta Mountains, as in the phrase “In the north the Śīta Mountains.”  Six houses are placed in the south, and these are depicted as reaching the Mountains of Fire, as in the sentence, “South from the center of the gola, the bow-shaped houses of time, dwelling in the fire mandala.” If the arrangement were as you have stated above, the outer edge of petal-shaped formation in the north would reach to the Mountains of Fire, and the northern part of the bow-shaped formation would reach to the regions of the Śīta Mountains.
This would be completely outside the meaning of quotes from the tantra and commentary, such as those beginning “South from the center of the gola, the bow-shaped houses of time.”
Therefore it must be that the depiction of the six houses of the north meets the depiction of Śīta Mountains directly in line with our central southern sector, and the depiction of the six houses of the south meets the depiction of the Mountains of Fire also directly in line with our central southern sector. If it were otherwise, consider this quote from the Great Commentary:
“In the center the chart of half the circle” refers to the chart of the equinox in the center of the circle of houses, at the point of 37,500 yojana, half of the 75,000 yojana.98 According to your assertion, this chart showing the sun’s path on the equinox between the Śīta Mountains and the Mountains of Fire would also have to be projected from the skies above Meru. Presentation of our own position
This is under three headings:
1.An explanation of the orbiting houses 2.How the houses orbit above the twelve sectors 3.An explanation of how the length of day and night are formed by the sun’s occupation of the houses An explanation of the orbiting houses Each lunar mansion is divided into four, and each quarter is known as a step.
Nine such steps make up one house or lagna.99 The twelve houses are those of Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces.100
The lunar mansions of aśvinī, bharaṇī, and one step of kṛttikā make up Aries.
Three steps of kṛttikā, the whole of rohiṇī, and two steps of mṛgaśīrṣa make up Taurus.
The last two steps of mṛgaśīrṣa, all of ārdrā, and three steps of punarvasu make up Gemini.
The last step of punarvasu, plus all of puṣya and āśleṣa make up Cancer. Magha, pūrvaphalgunī, and the first step of uttaraphalgunī make up Leo.
The last three steps of uttaraphalgunī, all of hasta, and the first two steps of citrā make up Virgo. The last two steps of citrā, the whole of svātī, and the first three steps of viśakhā make up Libra.
The last step of viśakhā, all of anurādha, and jyeṣṭha make up Scorpio.
Mūla, pūrvāṣāḍhā, and the first step of uttarāṣāḍhā make up Sagittarius. The last three steps of uttarāṣāḍhā, all of śravaṇa and uttarāṣāḍhā counted as one, and the first half of dhaniṣṭha make up Capricorn.
The last two steps of dhaniṣṭha, all of śatabhiṣak, and the last three steps of pūrvabhādra make up Aquarius.
The last step of pūrvabhādra, all of uttarabhādra, and revatī make up Pisces.
The boundaries of each of the twelve houses are as explained in Arising Letters:
Eyes, lunar mansions, and lunar-day hours is the measure of Aries,101
veda, sky, and fire is said to be Taurus,
taste and forty-five is Gemini,
nine and space is Cancer,
six and fifteen Leo,
thirteen and thirty is thought of as Virgo,
fifteen and forty-five is Libra,
wealth, moon, and emptiness is Scorpio, twenty and fifteen is the measure of Sagittarius,
union, eyes, and thirty is Capricorn,
conqueror and arrows is known to be Aquarius,
circle is known to be Pisces.102 How the houses orbit above the twelve sectors
This is under two headings: 1.An explanation of the term gola as a way of understanding the path of the twelve houses above our Lesser Jambudvīpa 2.By understanding the above, how it is possible to understand the orbiting of the gola over each of twelve sectors
An explanation of the term gola
Gola is a transliteration of a Sanskrit word.
If it were translated into Tibetan, it could be rendered as cylindrical, interior, round, and uneven in height.
Here it means round,103 and the spherical orbiting by the circle of lunar mansions over the twelve sectors is known as the gola of the houses.
The way to understand this gola is from the circular charts drawn on paper and described in the tantra and its commentary with quotes such as:
In the center, from aśvinī up to to half of citrā,104 the gola chart of the equinox of day and night.
These charts, therefore, are also known as gola.
The meaning of such quotes beginning “South from the center of the gola, the bow-shaped houses of time” is expressed in charts drawn on paper, and through them the path of the houses over our Lesser Jambudvīpa can be understood.
First a diagram105 is drawn to depict the water mandala and the twelve sectors between the Śīta Mountains and the Mountains of Fire, as previously described.
Then, from the midway point between the Śīta Mountains that directly face the central point of the depiction of Lesser Jambudvīpa, the central sector of the south, to the depiction of the fire mandala, a circle is drawn to illustrate the circular skies above this central point. This is the meaning of the term gola chart.
Then this circle is bisected directly along its east-west diameter to illustrate the path of the sun on the equinox at the central meridian of this sector. This diagram is the “chart” in the quote, “from the center of the gola chart drawn at the time of equal day and night.” Within that circle, east, south, west, and north are each divided into two parts. Together with the four intermediate directions, this makes twelve parts in all.
In the northern part of the east is Aries, in the northeast is Taurus, in the eastern part of the north is Gemini, in the western part of the north is Cancer, in the northwest is Leo, and in the northern part of the west is Virgo.
This illustrates the path of the six northern houses.
In the southern part of the west is Libra, in the southwest is Scorpio, in the western part of the south is Sagittarius, in the eastern part of the south is Capricorn, in the southeast is Aquarius, and in the southern part of the east is Pisces.
This illustrates the path of the six southern houses.
This is the thinking behind the passage in the Great Commentary beginning “in one half of the east is Aries” up to “in one half of the east is Pisces is an explanation of the houses in the gola.”
In this way, as soon as the mean sun arrives in any of the twelve houses, the path of the sun of that solar day at the central meridian of the central southern sector is also the path of the first stars of that particular house.
For example, on the day on which the mean sun enters Aries, the sun together with Aries travels the path of the equinox over the central meridian of the central southern sector.
Therefore the text from the tantra and commentary from “In the center, from aśvinī up to half of citrā” to “Aries in the east and Libra”  is explaining particularly the gola of Lesser Jambudvīpa at the center of the southern sector.
But what is the meaning of “bow-shaped” and “like fine lotus petals”? It is this. In the depiction of the path of the houses directly over the central southern sector, the six houses of the south and the six of the north are bisected by a line representing the equinox path. The six houses of the south are then in the shape of a bamboo bow and are depicted in the regions of the Mountains of Fire in the south.
The six houses of the north are in the shape of the petals of half a lotus and are depicted in the regions of the Śīta Mountains in the north.
If it were otherwise, as those mentioned above have maintained, then the bow formation in the regions of the Mountains of Fire and the lotus formation in the regions of the Śīta Mountains could not be explained.
Also, the shapes of both sets of six houses may be similar in that they are both semicircular, but in order to put these shapes into sragdhara meter,106 the words “fine lotus petals” were used.
By understanding the above, how it is possible to understand the orbiting of the gola over each of the twelve sectors
The Great Commentary says: Now the gola of the world is spoken of in detail. “From the fire to the borders of the Śīta Mountains is a distance of space, space, space, arrows, and mountains, as thousands of yojana.” This means that from the southern fire mandala to the borders of the great snows of the north is a distance of 75,000 yojana.107 This and subsequent passages clearly reveal that when charts are drawn depicting meridians running from above the Śīta Mountains directly in line with each of the twelve sectors stretching to a similar point above the Mountains of Fire, and when these meridians are bisected midway by lines illustrating the path of the equinox sun over each of the sectors, then the northern parts of these intersections would stretch for a distance of half of 75,000 yojana, or 37,500 yojana, to the edge of the Śīta Mountains. Similarly, south of the intersection, the distance to the edge of the Mountains of Fire would also be 37,500 yojana.
From this the pathway of the twelve houses over the other eleven sectors can be known and is illustrated by the chart of the central southern sector. What is the pathway of the twelve houses over the other eleven sectors?
A circle is drawn from the Śīta Mountains directly facing each of the sectors to a similar point directly above the Mountains of Fire, and its east-west diameter is bisected. This illustrates the path of the houses and lunar mansions in which the sun has arrived at the time of the equinox for each of the sectors.
Therefore, from the central meridian at the east-west center of the eastern sector of the south, the sun is in Pisces at the spring equinox.
In the western sector of the east, it is in Aquarius, and in the central eastern sector it is in Capricorn.
Moving to the left, this continues from Sagittarius in the eastern sector of the east up to Taurus in the western sector of the south.
To illustrate the pathway of all twelve houses above each of the eleven sectors, the four directions of east, south, west, and north within the charts are divided into two parts each.
Together with the four intermediate directions, this makes twelve sectors.
Applying this to the eastern southern sector, in the northern section of the east lies Pisces, in the northeast is Aries, in the eastern section of the north is Taurus, in the western part is Gemini, in the northwest is Cancer, and in the northern section of the west is Leo.
These are the six northern houses.
Similarly, in the southern section of the west is found Virgo, in the southwest is Libra, in the western section of the south lies Scorpio, in the eastern section of the south is Sagittarius, in the southeast is Capricorn, and in the southern section of the east lies Aquarius.
These are the six southern houses. Likewise, in the western southern sector, the directions are divided into twelve parts.
In the northern section of the east is Aquarius, in the northeast Pisces, in the eastern section of the north Aries, in the western section of the north Taurus, in the southwest Gemini, and in the northern section of the west Cancer.
These are the six northern houses.
In the southern section of the west lies Leo, in the southwest Virgo, in the western section of the south Libra, in the eastern section of the south Scorpio, in the southeast Sagittarius, and in the southern section of the east Capricorn.
These are the six southern houses. Similarly the central eastern sector is divided into twelve parts. In the northern section of the east is found Capricorn. Then in the northeast, the second section moving to the left, is found Aquarius, in the third, the eastern section of the north, is Pisces, in the fourth, the western section of the north, is Aries, in the fifth, the northwest, is Taurus, and in the sixth, the northern section of the west, is Gemini.
These are the six northern houses. In the seventh section, the southern section of the west, is Cancer;
in the eighth, or the southwest is Leo; in the ninth, the western section of the south, is Virgo; in the tenth, or the eastern section of the south, is Libra; in the eleventh, or the southeast, is Scorpio;
and in the twelfth, the southern section of the east, is Sagittarius. These are the six southern houses. The eastern sector of the east is also divided into twelve parts.
In the northern section of the east is Sagittarius, in the northeast Capricorn, in the eastern section of the north Aquarius, in the western section of the north Pisces, in the northwest Aries, and in the northern section of the west Taurus.
These are the six northern houses.
In the southern section of the west lies Gemini, in the southwest Cancer, in the western section of the south Leo, in the eastern section of the south Virgo, in the southeast Libra, and in the southern section of the east Scorpio.
These are the six southern houses. In the western sector of the north the directions are also divided into twelve parts. In the northern section of the east lies Scorpio, in the northeast Sagittarius, in the eastern section of the north Capricorn, in the western section of the north Aquarius, in the northwest Pisces, and in the northern section of the west Aries.
These are the six northern houses. In the southern section of the west is Taurus, in the southwest is Gemini, in the western section of the south is Cancer, in the eastern section of the south is Leo, in the southeast is Virgo, and in the southern section of the east is Libra.
These are the six southern houses.
In the central sector of the north the directions are also divided into twelve parts. In the northern section of the east lies Libra, in the northeast Scorpio, in the eastern section of the north Sagittarius, in the western section of the north Capricorn, in the northwest Aquarius, and in the northern section of the west Pisces. These are the six northern houses. In the southern section of the west is Aries, in the southwest is Taurus, in the western section of the south is Gemini, in the eastern section of the south is Cancer, in the southeast is Leo, and in the southern section of the east is Virgo. These are the six southern houses.
In the eastern sector of the north the directions are divided into twelve parts. In the northern section of the east lies Virgo, in the northeast Libra, in the eastern section of the north Scorpio, in the western section of the north Sagittarius, in the northwest Capricorn, and in the northern section of the west Aquarius. These are the six northern houses.
In the southern section of the west is Pisces, in the southwest is Aries, in the western section of the south is Taurus, in the eastern section of the south is Gemini, in the southeast is Cancer, and in the southern section of the east is Leo.
These are the six southern houses. In the westernmost sector of the west the directions are divided into twelve parts.
In the northern section of the east lies Leo, in the northeast Virgo, in the eastern section of the north Libra, in the western section of the north Scorpio, in the northwest Sagittarius, and in the northern section of the west Capricorn.
These are the six northern houses.
In the southern section of the west is Aquarius, in the southwest is Pisces, in the western section of the south is Aries, in the eastern section of the south is Taurus, in the southeast is Gemini, and in the southern section of the east is Cancer.
These are the six southern houses. In the central sector of the north the directions are also divided into twelve parts.
In the northern section of the east lies Cancer, in the northeast Leo, in the eastern section of the north Virgo, in the western section of the north Libra, in the northwest Scorpio, and in the northern section of the west Sagittarius.
These are the six northern houses. In the southern section of the west is Capricorn, in the southwest is Aquarius, in the western section of the south is Pisces, in the eastern section of the south is Aries, in the southeast is Taurus, and in the southern section of the east is Gemini. These are the six southern houses. In the easternmost sector of the west the directions are also divided into twelve parts.
In the northern section of the east lies Gemini, in the northeast lies Cancer, in the eastern section of the north is Leo, in the western section of the north is Virgo, in the northwest is Libra, and in the northern section of the west is Scorpio. These are the six northern houses.
In the southern section of the west is Sagittarius, in the southwest is Capricorn, in the western section of the south is Aquarius, in the eastern section of the south is Pisces, in the southeast is Aries, and in the southern section of the east is Taurus.
These are the six southern houses. In the western sector of the south the directions are also divided into twelve parts.
In the northern section of the east lies Taurus, in the northeast Gemini, in the eastern section of the north Cancer, in the western section of the north Leo, in the northwest Virgo, and in the northern section of the west Libra. These are the six northern houses.
In the southern section of the west is Scorpio, in the southwest is Sagittarius, in the western section of the south is Capricorn, in the eastern section of the south is Aquarius, in the southeast is Pisces, and in the southern section of the east is Aries.
These are the six southern houses. Therefore this particular way of constructing charts on paper and other materials is a method of knowing, clearly and unmistakably, the path of the twelve houses over each of the twelve sectors. This is an illustration of the profound point “If one corner is held, the whole can be moved” and is the definitive position of the commentary. You who assert the above should look on this as new advice. The explanation that the path of the houses runs above a region stretching from the Śīta Mountains to the Mountains of Fire is based upon the path of the lunar mansions and houses together with the other stars.
However, the actual path of the houses with the lunar mansions, sun, moon, and other planets is within an area that covers 12,500 yojana of the earth mandala and reaches outward up to three quarters of the water mandala to make an area of 50,000 yojana.
This has been correctly taught by scholars .
The reason for their assertion is as follows. If a gnomon is planted in the ground at midday here in our land of Tibet on the day the sun has traveled its farthest north, its shadow will still face slightly to the north. Therefore, this establishes that the sun, as well as the house and lunar mansion that the sun occupies, dwells to the south of our land of Tibet.
Tibet is the fifth land of the six lands, which in order from the north are Himālaya, Kailash, China, Khotan, Tibet, and India.
Therefore, in the sixth land, at the southern limit of India, one’s shadow would simply surround oneself.
While it can be accepted that even at the time of the northernmost point of its travels the sun does not come up beyond the southern limit of India,108 how is it established that the path109 of the sun along with the houses and lunar mansions stretches for 50,000 yojana up to three quarters of the water mandala, 12,500 yojana inward from its edge?
The Great Commentary says:
Here the measurement of the gola is 75,000 yojana from the fire mandala of the south to the snows of the north. “Similarly orbiting east and west,” this is taught clearly in the fifth chapter.110
Therefore a circular chart is drawn from the center of an equinox path and stretches to depictions of the Śīta Mountains and the Mountains of Fire in order to illustrate the path of the twelve houses above each of the twelve sectors. However this illustration of the pathway of the houses, lunar mansions, and sun is a generalized and rough depiction.
The specific path should be known from explanations found in the Gnosis chapter. The text of these explanations is missing from some translations, including the Shong and new Jonang translations.
However, after verse 190 from the Gyijo and Ma translations, there is this verse:
The limits of the sun’s travels north and south stretch three quarters of the Salt Ocean and up to Kailash
for a distance of 50,000 yojana.
In a halved chart, day and night are of space fire111 hours.
50,000 is completed in eyes, nāga, and moon,112 traveling from day to day.113
This verse is the reference for the previous commentary quote, and so those previously mentioned scholars who have taught this are correct. An explanation of how the length of day and night are formed by the sun’s occupation of the houses
The houses and the lunar mansions orbit Meru in a clockwise direction to the right, and by the force of the wind carrying the houses, the sun and the planets that occupy the houses also orbit Meru to the right.
However, in terms of their individual movements, the sun and the other planets, with the exception of Rāhu, enter and occupy the lunar mansions by orbiting Meru in a counterclockwise direction to the left.
The planets make both southward and northward journeys, while the houses and the lunar mansions have no southward or northward path and no individual movements. They move over the same path they have always followed, regardless of the sector they are traversing.
The Great Commentary says: Therefore this orbiting force is that of the houses but not that of the sun that dwells in the houses.
The circle of the houses orbits to the right, the planets move into the houses to the left.
Just as the circle of houses orbit, likewise Rāhu, facing west, travels to the right.
The east-facing planets travel around Meru to the left and move through the circle of houses.114
It is in this way that the sun is the main indicator of the differences in time and so forth. Therefore it is necessary to know, among other things, which house the sun is occupying in the regions of the twelve sectors at the times of the limits of sun’s northward and southward passages and of the equinoxes. This will be explained. First let us explain the spring equinox.
The lunar mansion position of the mean sun is set at zero in all places.115 As soon as the mean sun arrives at Aries, it marks the beginning of the seasons and of the spring equinox at the central meridian of the central sector of the south.
Likewise the spring equinox occurring at the direct center of the other eleven sectors clockwise from the south, such as the western sector of the south, can be matched to the immediate arrival of the mean sun in the other houses, such as Taurus.
Therefore, by the arrival of the mean sun in Taurus, a spring equinox occurs at the direct center of the western sector of the south.
Similarly, moving clockwise, when the spring equinox occurs at the third sector, the mean sun will appear in the charts in Gemini, at the fourth in Cancer, at the fifth in Leo, at the sixth in Virgo, at the seventh in Libra, at the eighth in Scorpio, at the ninth in Sagittarius, at the tenth in Capricorn, at the eleventh in Aquarius, and when spring equinox occurs at the direct center of the twelfth, or the eastern, sector of the south, the mean sun arrives in Pisces.
The above are the equinoxes over the direct center of the sectors, but to be more precise, within each sector more than thirty equinoxes can occur.
From the moment the mean sun enters Aries until it enters Taurus, the area of land from the center of the central southern sector to the center of the western sector of the south can be divided into thirty parts that constitute thirty solar days, and on each day a spring equinox will occur. Similarly, from the arrival of the mean sun in Taurus until the moment of its arrival in Gemini, the area from the center of the western sector of the south to the center of the eastern sector of the west is divided into thirty parts, each covering a solar day, and on each day a spring equinox will occur.
The same applies to the other areas.
The exceptions are the area from the center of the eastern sector of the west to the center of the central sector of the west, the area from the center of the eastern sector of the north to the center of the central sector of the north, and the area from the center of the eastern sector of the east to the center of the central sector of the east: all these are divided into thirty-one.
The area from the center of the eastern sector of the south to the center of the central sector of the south is divided into thirty-two.
The spring equinox occurs on each of these solar days. These are exceptions to the above. The months, named according to their full-moon lunar mansions116 and designated as early, middle, and later,117 are linked to particular houses in which the sun dwells. The half-month in which the mean sun enters Aries will be one of the two halves of a waxing-led Caitra.
If the mean sun entering Aries appears in the chart on any date from the first to the fifteenth of the waxing, Aries is assigned to Caitra.
When the mean sun entering Aries appears in the chart on any date from the first to the fifteenth of the waning, Aries is assigned to a waning-led Vaiśākha, which is then designated as the beginning of the year.
The Great Commentary says:
In this Lesser Jambudvīpa, south of Meru, the houses of Aries and so forth, the times of spring and so forth, the months of Caitra and so forth, and the halves are all well known.118 This shows Aries assigned to a waxing-led Caitra. Again the Great Commentary states: In this continent south of Meru, the sun dwells in Aries, and Vaiśākha is the spring.119 This illustrates the house of Aries assigned to a waning-led Vaiśākha.
In this way, the month assigned to Aries when that month is waxing-led will be Caitra in all of the twelve sectors, and when waning-led, the month assigned to Aries will be Vaiśākha in all twelve sectors.
When the month of the sun entering Aries is designated a waxing-led month, here in our central sector of the south, middle spring is the month of Caitra.
Proceeding counterclockwise, in the second sector, or the eastern sector of the south, later spring is Caitra.
In the third sector counterclockwise, early summer is Caitra.
In the fourth, middle summer is Caitra. In the fifth, later summer is Caitra. In the sixth, Caitra is in early autumn;
in the seventh, Caitra is middle autumn;
and in the eighth, it is later autumn.
In the ninth sector Caitra occurs in early winter, in the tenth in middle winter, and in the eleventh in later winter.
In the twelfth sector, the western sector of the south, Caitra is in early spring.
When the month of the sun’s residence in Aries is designated a waning-led month, in this central sector of the south, later spring is the month of Vaiśākha. Similarly, moving counterclockwise, in the second sector, early summer is Vaiśākha.
In the third, middle summer is Vaiśākha, and so on, until the twelfth sector, the western sector of the south, where middle spring would be Vaiśākha. When the sun, on its journey from Aries, arrives in Cancer, it has reached the limit of its northward journey from the standpoint of the center of this central sector of the south.
Similarly, proceeding clockwise, the northern limit of the sun’s journey from the standpoint of the direct center of each of the remaining eleven sectors can be applied to the moment the mean sun arrives in Leo and the other eleven houses. For example, at the direct center of the western sector of the south, it is the moment of the sun’s arrival in Leo that marks the limit of the sun’s northward journey.
Similarly, moving clockwise, the moment of the mean sun’s arrival in Virgo marks the limit of the sun’s northward journey at the direct center of the third sector, or the eastern sector of the west. Similarly it is Libra at the fourth clockwise, Scorpio at the fifth, Sagittarius at the sixth, Capricorn at the seventh, Aquarius at the eighth, Pisces at the ninth, Aries at the tenth, Taurus at the eleventh.
And the moment of the mean sun’s arrival at Gemini marks the limit of the sun’s northward journey at the direct center of the eastern sector of the south. This can be looked at in more detail. Between the sun’s journey from Cancer and the moment of its arrival in Leo, the area from the direct center of the central sector of the south to the center of the western sector of the south can be divided into thirty parts. In each part the sun will travel to its northern limit, which means a summer solstice,120 occurring each time. A summer solstice, therefore, occurs thirty times.
Likewise, between the sun’s journey from Leo and the moment of its arrival in Virgo, the area from the direct center of the western sector of the south to the center of the eastern sector of the west can be divided into thirty parts. In each part the sun will travel to its northern limit, bringing about a summer solstice each time. Here, too, a summer solstice occurs thirty times.
This process can be applied to the other sectors. The exceptions can be known from the section above on the equinoxes. The moment of the mean sun’s arrival in Libra is the autumn equinox at the direct center of our central sector of the south.
Similarly, the moments of the mean sun’s arrivals at Scorpio and the other eleven houses, and, clockwise, the corresponding autumn equinoxes at the direct center of the western sector of the south and the other eleven sectors, can be known in the same way that the spring equinoxes were known.
The moment of the sun’s arrival in Capricorn marks the limit of the sun’s southward passage at the direct center of the central sector of the south, and is the winter solstice. Similarly the moment of arrival of the mean sun in Aquarius and the other eleven houses marks the limits of the sun’s southward passages and winter solstices at, clockwise, the western sector of the south and the other eleven sectors respectively.
For example, the moment of the mean sun’s arrival in Aquarius marks the limit of the sun’s southward passage as well as the winter solstice at the direct center of the western sector of the south.
Similarly, as soon as the mean sun arrives in Pisces, the sun’s southward journey is at its limit for the direct center of the eastern sector of the west, and that moment marks its winter solstice. This continues until the moment of the mean sun’s arrival in Sagittarius, which marks the winter solstice and limit of the sun’s southward journey at the direct center of the eastern sector of the south. If this is looked at in more detail, between the moment of the sun’s arrival in Capricorn and the moment of its arrival in Aquarius, the area from the center of the central sector of the south to the center of the western sector of the south is divided into thirty parts. At each part the sun reaches the limit of its southward passage, and therefore the winter solstice also occurs.
Correspondence between the remaining eleven houses and eleven sectors can be understood in the same way.
In this way, during the course of a year illustrated by the mean sun circling from Aries to Aries, the sun makes a little over 365 clockwise orbits of Meru. Therefore the area of the twelve sectors can be divided into three 365 parts, and at each part the sun will reach the limit of its southward passage, and at each limit a winter solstice will occur.
In the same way the limits of the northward summer journeys as well as the spring and autumn equinoxes can also be known. Now I will discuss the scriptural references and reasonings that substantiate the above. The Great Commentary says:
How are the additions and omissions to be known? Before the first month of the northward passage, ten days are to be studied by the shadow of the gnomon. As soon as the shadow of the sun stick turns from north, that day, that date, that yoga, that karaṇa is the solar day on which the sun changes its movement.
On that solar day the sun is at twenty in the lunar mansion place121 and at fifteen in the hours place. This is the primary definition. Ten days before the winter solstice, the shadow of a gnomon is examined, and the time when the shadow turns from heading north is the time of the winter solstice. The sun on that day is twenty lunar mansions and fifteen hours. This is explained as being the moment the sun leaves Sagittarius and enters Capricorn.
The region where this occurs is the direct center of this central sector of the south. The country or region where the karaṇa astronomy taught in the tantra was mainly practiced is the noble country of India at the center of this central sector of the south.
It is with this region in mind that it was taught that the sun’s position of twenty lunar mansions and fifteen hours corresponds to the winter solstice at the moment the sun enters Capricorn. In the section from the Great Commentary explaining increment and decrement in the sun’s stages according to karaṇa it says:
“Because of its travels there is increment and decrement concerning the sun. Others have no accurate positions.” These words are definitive.122
Explaining this line, the commentary continues: The result obtained by that fraction is a number of hours, and in the place of hours it is an increment.
Because of its travels there is decrement. Because of its travels, there is also an increment in Capricorn and so forth and a decrement in Cancer and so forth.123 According to karaṇa methodology, the moment of the sun’s arrival in Capricorn is the start of the northward journey, and the moment of the sun’s arrival in Cancer is the start of the southward passage.
Therefore those scholars 124 are not correct when they maintain that the statement asserting twenty in the position of the lunar mansions and fifteen in the position of hours to be the winter solstice refers to the western edge of the central sector of the south. Here’s why.
It would follow that the statement positing the moment of the sun’s arrival in Aries as being the spring equinox on the central sector of the south also refers to the western edge of the central sector of the south.
This cannot be, because if that were the case, the statement that the sun in Aries at the direct center of the central sector of the east corresponds to the beginning of the day at the central sector of the south would also have to refer to the western edge of the central sector of the south.
It cannot mean that, because it would contradict the quote beginning “For half the path of 300,000.”125 Therefore, as explained above, the moment of the sun’s arrival in Sagittarius marks the limit of the sun’s southward passage for the eastern sector of the south at its the direct center. Then, for each of a little over thirty days, the area from the center of the eastern sector of the south to the center of the central sector of the south is divided into thirty parts, and it is established that the limit of the sun’s southward passage occurs at each part, with a winter solstice occurring each time. This can be established. The master Abhaya126 says in his Kālacakrāvatāra:
Therefore I will speak on the path of siddhānta. These are the stages. On level ground in the middle of a circle of one cubit diameter, plant a stick in the ground that measures the length from the tip of your thumb to the tip of your middle finger. The line of the stick’s morning shadow gradually shortens from outside the mandala. When it reaches the edge of the mandala, at that time and in that place, make the mark of the crowfoot.127 That is the west.
In the afternoon the shadow gradually lengthens from the center of the mandala. Repeat the process as before, and the mark will indicate the east.
Anchoring thread at one of the marks, and beginning directly in front of the other mark, draw a circle with chalk. Anchor thread at the other mark and do the same, thereby creating the shape of a fish.
In the middle of the two circles, the center of the mouth of the fish is the south, and the center of the tail is the north.128 Having ascertained the directions rub out the circles.
Starting from the tenth day before the sun makes its northward journey, make observations at midday.
When the shadow begins to move inside from the northern edge of the original circle, that is the day the sun changes to its northward journey.129 In an experiment similar to this, seven sixty-year cycles after Fire Rabbit year, the first of the past years, plus twenty single years, in the unfinished year of the male Fire Dog130 , I carried out observations using the gnomon at the time of the winter solstice. On the fifth day of the twelfth month of the Hor calendar,132 the shadow was seen to turn from heading northward. Therefore on the fourth, the previous day, the winter solstice was established for the place where we had been standing.
It was also at the point where 4/13 of the fourth calendar day had passed.
Using siddhānta astronomy, the mean sun of 3/13 of the fourth day was calculated to be at the position of eighteen lunar mansions and thirty-one hours, thirty minutes exactly.133 A position of twenty lunar mansions and fifteen hours134 is reached by adding twenty-three days plus 3/13 of one day of the sun’s fixed motion.135 Therefore the winter solstice is established for the direct center of the central sector of the south at the point of the completion of 3/13 of the twenty-eighth day of the twelfth Hor month.
This established that the region we were occupying was the twenty-third region east of the center of the central sector of the south from among the division of thirty separate regions ranging from the center of the central sector of the south to the center of the eastern sector of the south, and in that region the winter solstice occurred on the fourth day of the twelfth Hor month of that year.
Using the same reasoning, it is possible to know the winter solstice for each of the 365 regions divided among the twelve sectors. The omniscient Butön calculated the sun’s southern limit and winter solstice in our particular region as being the sun’s occupation of nineteen lunar mansions and fifteen hours.136  However, the Great Commentary says:
In the king of tantras, definitions137 are not fixed. At the end of sixty years, the definitions are to be done again.138 Therefore, from the prabhava Fire Rabbit first year of the past years until this present Water Rabbit year,139 457 years have passed. Over that time in karaṇa astronomy, the middle place multiplied by Śiva140 has accumulated an excess of about twenty-three hours for the sun. If those twenty-three hours are subtracted from nineteen lunar mansions and fifteen hours, which is asserted these days as being the position of the winter sun’s solstice, the result is eighteen lunar mansions and fifty-two hours.
Therefore this establishes that even according to those who use karaṇa astronomy these days, and who maintain the same mansion position as the omniscient Butön, at the time of the winter solstice in this land of ours, about nineteen days of the sun’s coursing still has to be added before it arrives at the position of twenty lunar mansions and fifteen hours.
Therefore, by this reasoning, even according those who assert the above would have to agree that our land was the nineteenth land eastward from the center of the central sector of the south among the thirty separate lands apportioned from the eastern sector of the south to the central sector of the south, and that there would be a winter solstice on that nineteenth land counted eastward from the central sector of the south.
Contrary to the above, the presentations of those  who adhere to general karaṇa astronomy  can be known from their extensive refutation elsewhere.141
Furthermore, the Great Commentary says: “Orbiting the circle of houses in all regions of Meru, when the sun reaches the Fire in the region of the seventh, it touches the peak142 of Meru and journeys above the mountains of snow.” By this reasoning, the lengths of time and so forth of the sun dwelling in each house can be known in all.143 This passage indicates that the time of the winter solstice is ascertained generally at each of the sectors each year, and from that it can be understood that thirty winter solstices occur on each of these sectors.
How is this understood? Using the central sector of the south as an illustration, the passage explains that the moment the sun arrives in Cancer, the peak or horns of Meru directly facing the direct center of the central sector of the south are touched by the rays of the sun. On the same solar day the rays of the sun will also reach the regions above the inner limit of the Mountains of Fire that directly face the central sector of the north, which is the seventh sector counting from the central southern sector.144 When the mean sun is at nineteen lunar mansions and seven hours and thirty minutes, which is the sun’s arrival at the halfway point of Sagittarius, the rays of the sun touch the peak or horns of Meru facing the land of the eastern edge of the central sector of the south divided into thirty separate parts.
On that day also on the seventh sector from the central sector of the south, the central sector of the north, on the land at the eastern edge, the rays of the sun will reach the regions above the inner limit of the Mountains of Fire.
This can be inferred by the phrase “Orbiting the circle of houses in all regions of Meru.” Assertions contrary to the above say that there is only one limit to the sun’s northward and southward passages on each sector each year. Other scholars  maintain that there is only one winter and summer solstice each year in each sector. If these were correct, consider the following. When the sun arrives in Capricorn, the length of the day of the direct center of the east-west meridian of Kailash is twenty-five hours.
According to the above, it would follow that the day must be twenty-five hours long also at the eastern edge of Kailash, because these two regions share the same time of winter solstice.
If that is asserted, then consider this. As soon as the sun enters Capricorn, one zodiacal month145 has passed since the winter solstice in the eastern sector of the south in the center of a region corresponding to Kailash, and the length of the day in that region is twenty-six hours and forty minutes. Similarly, in the eastern sector of the south, at the western edge of a region corresponding to Kailash, it would follow that a day would also have to be twenty-six hours and forty minutes,  because the winter solstice at the center of the eastern sector of the south and at the western edge of that sector occurs at the same time.
If that is so, then it would be incorrect to hold that the length of a day at the eastern edge of Kailash of the central sector of the south was twenty-five hours, and on that very day the length of a day on the western edge of a region corresponding to Kailash on the eastern sector of the south was twenty-six hours and forty minutes, because the eastern edge of Kailash of the central sector of the south and the western edge of a corresponding region on the eastern sector of the south border each other.
This matter can also be discussed by looking at the extent of the sun’s rays, but that is enough for now.
Some say that the Great Commentary passage “Orbiting the circle of houses in all regions of Meru” and so on may indeed teach that at the time of the limits of the two passages of the sun, the rays of the sun reach the peak or horns of Meru and the regions above the inner limit of the Mountains of Fire.
However, if this means that the disk of the sun itself does not travel to these two places, then consider this quote from the Great Commentary:
“Having covered the Salt Ocean, the sun travels as far as the fire in the south.” This means that the sun, having covered the Salt Ocean by way of the houses over each of the sectors divided by the twelve spokes, it travels to dwell in the south as far as the beginning of the fire mandala at the end of the oceans.
From that point of the fire mandala, it travels to the north of Kailash, to Himālaya, moving north on its northward journey.146
Doesn’t this quote preclude such an assertion?
It does not, because these words from the Great Commentary teach that it is the rays147 of the sun that travel to the regions above the inner rim of the Mountains of Fire and as far as the peak or horns of Meru.
The Condensed Tantra says:
Above at six and nāga, the rays of the sun at the northward limit.
Then, in clockwise direction, lord of men, ceasing at 11,000.
From the center at 81,000, less arrows hundred, the gola chart,
increasing and decreasing space, space, arrows, and arrows, to the north and south.
Having covered the Salt Ocean, the sun travels as far as the fire in the south.148 This quote shows that the phrase “rays of the sun” is to be applied as clarification to the subsequent lines beginning, “Having covered the Salt Ocean.” Similarly:
“Together with a half, eyes, nāga, moon, day after day is spent.”  This means a total of 182½.149 These are the individual solar days of one direction of the 75,000 yojana traveled by the sun.150
“Spent”151 in this passage means spent by the rays of the sun.
This is not a presentation that excludes the area covered by the “spender” but one that includes it, and so the line ending “the 75,000 yojana spent by the sun” is also talking of the area spent by the rays of the sun. If the “spender’s” reach were not included in the portion spent, then the following consequence would occur. The circumference of the sun’s disk is not clearly taught in this tantra and its commentaries, but in the Abhidharmakośa it says, “of fifty-one yojana,”152 thereby explaining the measurement of the disk of the sun to be fifty-one yojana.
Therefore you would have to accept that the sun travels for “Together with a half, eyes, nāga, moon” or 182½ days over 75,000 minus a third of fifty-one, or seventeen, yojana.153 In that case, ask yourself how, even for you, that does not contradict the quote ending, “75,000 yojana traveled by the sun.”
The Abhidharma assertion is a rough estimate made on the basis of commonly accepted views. This can be examined in more detail. A chain of sun discs arranged in a lunar mansion would not exceed sixty in number, and in each lunar mansion there are sixty hours of distance. Therefore it must be that the distance between the northern and southern edge of the sun’s disk is at least one hour of distance, and one hour of distance is a little over 231 yojana.
To believe that at the time of the sun’s northern limit, the sun’s disk actually reaches the peak or horns of Meru would contradict our actual experience that here in this land of Tibet, the shadow of the gnomon still shows north on the day of the sun’s northern limit, as previously described.
How far does the sun travel on each day of its northward journey? 182 ½ days are divided among 50,000 yojana. That results in a little over 273 yojana, three krośa, and 1,780 armspans.

The height above the earth mandala that the sun travels is explained as follows. Whichever region the sun may be over at the time of its northern limit of that sector, its rays are at a height of 86,000 yojana. Above the area of the seventh sector from that particular region, which would be a region of the sun’s southern limit, the rays are at a height of 86,000 yojana less 11,000, or 75,000 yojana. The sun therefore travels clockwise around Meru in an undulating154 fashion. Therefore it is taught that in any region the distance between the ground and the rays of the sun is explained as being 86,000 yojana at the sun’s northern limit and 75,000 yojana at its southern limit.
It can be understood, therefore, that from the area of its northern limit until its southward journey is completed, the sun and its rays drop each day by sixty yojana, one krośa, 191 armspans, three cubits, two fingerwidths, and 350/365 of a fingerwidth.
Similarly it can be understood that from the time of the sun’s southern limit until its northward journey is completed, each day it gains in height by the same distance. What is the reach of the sun’s rays?
Some say that it is 14,000 yojana, and others say 12,500 yojana.
If the previous quote is to be translated, “touches the peak of Meru,” then the rays of the lower regions of sun extend for 14,000 yojana, because at the time of its northern limit the disk of the sun is level with the peak of Meru.155 The length of the directional rays, such as those from its southern side, for example, must be 12,500 yojana, because at the time of its northern limit the tip of the sun’s rays must be posited as reaching the peak of Meru, and at such a time the distance between the disk of the sun and Meru is not more than 12,500 yojana.
If we read the quote according to the Shong translation as “touches the horns of Meru,”156  the rays from the lower regions of the sun disk also travel for 12,500 yojana.
The circumference of the sun’s undulating daily motion, the sun’s ecliptic, and the distance from the lunar mansion of aśvinī to the lunar mansion of revatī157 is 375,000 yojana.
In hours that is equal to 1,620 hours of distance. During the sun’s undulating revolution around Meru, there are six places in each sector where night and day are of different lengths.
These six places are explained as follows. Of the 25,000 yojana of the earth mandala that stretches from the outer edge of the Śīta Mountains to the inner rim of the water mandala, the northern half is divided into six separate parts.
Of these the northernmost part of Himālaya borders the Śīta Mountains. The southern edge of the noble land of India directly faces the disk of the sun on the day of the sun’s northern limit.158 This is established by the shadow of a gnomon on that day.
In this way, from the southern edge of the Śīta Mountains on the earth mandala of the central sector of the south to the inner rim of the water mandala, the northern half of the 25,000 yojana is divided into six regions comprising, from the north, Himālaya, Kailash, China, Khotan, Tibet, and India. Likewise the remaining eleven sectors can be presented as having six regions of similar proportions. At the direct center of the six regions of this central sector of the south, night and day can be of different lengths due to the sun’s passages. Similarly, on the six regions of the other sectors, it should be understood that differences in the lengths of day and night will also occur.
The way night and day differ in length in the central sector of the south is as follows. At the time of equal day and night on the central meridian of the central sector of the south, daytime is thirty hours and nighttime is thirty hours in each of the six regions. Each day on from this time of a common equinox, the time of day increases and the length of night decreases by the following times on the six regions as the sun moves north. At Himālaya it increases by three minutes,159 five breaths, 3/5 of a breath, and 130/365 of that again. At Kailash it is three minutes, one breath, 2/3 of a breath, and 130/365 of that again.
In China it is two minutes, four breaths, 6/7 of a breath, and 130/365 of that again.
In Khotan it is two minutes, two breaths, 3/4 of a breath, and one 130/365 of that again.
In Tibet it is two minutes, one breath, 1/9 of a breath, and 130/365 of that again. In India it is one minute, five breaths, 4/5 of a breath, and 130/365 of that again. When the sun reaches the limit of its northward journey at the central meridian of the central sector of the south, the length of the daytime is thirty-six hours; thirty-five hours; thirty-four hours, seventeen minutes, and 6/7 of a breath;
thirty-three hours and forty-five minutes;
thirty-three hours and twenty minutes;
and thirty-three hours, respectively, in the six regions from Himālaya to India.
The nighttime also decreases to twenty-four hours; twenty-five hours; twenty-five hours, forty-two minutes, five breaths, and 1/7 of a breath; twenty-six hours and fifteen minutes;
twenty-six hours, forty minutes;
and finally twenty-seven hours from Himālaya to India, respectively.
Similarly, when the sun moves south from the equinox, the length of night increases and daytime decreases each day at each of the six regions by the same amounts as above. At the southern limit of the sun’s travels, the lengths of day and night are the reverse of the above and can be known accordingly. To match all this with supporting references from the tantra and commentaries, and to look at points of doubt, the Great Commentary says, on the thirty-eighth verse of the Realms chapter: Concerning this measurement, on the day of moving south, thirty-six hours are of daytime and twenty-four are of night.
Similarly, when traveling north, the length of day and night can be known by reversing this.160
This explains that in Himālaya, daytime increases by twelve hours and nighttime decreases by twelve hours between the time of the sun’s southern limit and the time of the sun’s northern limit. In Kailash, from the southern limit to the northern limit, a fifth of a sixty-hour day and night is established as being the increase and decrease. The Great Commentary says on the fifty-fourth verse of the Realms chapter:
Here increase and decrease is by one sixth. By a sixth part of sixty, or ten hours, nighttime decreases and daytime increases from Capricorn to the end of Gemini.
From Cancer to the end of Sagittarius, daytime decreases and nighttime increases. “Definitely sun and moon decrease and increase” means by one sixth.
On the continent of Kailash, the ascertainment of the shadow is not that of India.
In India, on the sun’s journey from the north to its southern limit and from the south to the northern limit, the increase and decrease, as ascertained by the shadow, is by a tenth.
Likewise, in the lands of Tibet, Khotan, China, and so forth, it is by a ninth, an eighth, a seventh, and so on. In this way, as far as the land of Shambhala, increase and decrease can be known by the reading of the shadow.161
Thus, in Kailash, from the limit of the southward passage to the limit of the northward passage, daytime increases and nighttime decreases by a sixth of sixty hours, or ten hours. In the lands of India, Tibet, Khotan, and China, daytime increases and nighttime decreases respectively by a tenth of sixty hours, or six hours;
by a ninth, or six hours and forty minutes; by an eighth, or seven hours and thirty minutes;
and by a seventh, or eight hours, thirty-four minutes, one breath, and 5/7 of a breath.
Therefore the increase and decrease of day and night found from one limit to the other in the six lands is twelve hours in Himālaya;
ten hours in Kailash; eight hours, thirty-four minutes, one breath, and 5/7 of a breath in China; seven hours and thirty minutes in Khotan; six hours and forty minutes in Tibet;
and six hours in India.
These figures are halved, and one half is added to the thirty hours of equinox daytime, and one half is subtracted from the thirty hours of equinox nighttime, to arrive at the above figures for the length of daytime and nighttime on the day of the limit of the sun’s northward journey at each of the six lands.
It is the thinking of the commentary that these increases and decreases in the length of a day as explained here refer to solar days.
The Great Commentary says on the thirty-eighth verse of the Realms chapter:
The stages of the journey are 82 ½ solar days more than a hundred. In the south on these solar days, on the stages of the journey, nighttime increases, while in its north it is the daytime.162 Therefore the final increase and decrease at the limits of the travels is counted in solar days.
Moreover any decrease and increase has to be noted from day to day. Some might say, “According to you, the change each day in Himālaya is three minutes, five breaths, 3/5 of a breath, and 130/365 of that again. This contradicts the Great Commentary where it says: North of Kailash as far as Himālaya, each day the stages of the travel increase and decrease by four breaths and three minutes.163 “Also for you, in Kailash the increase and decrease for each day is three minutes, one breath, 2/3 of a breath, and 130/365 of that again.
In India, according to you, the increase and decrease for each day is one minute, five breaths, 4/5 of a breath, and 130/365 of that again.
In the Great Commentary it says:
Each day, daytime and nighttime increases or decreases by two breaths and three minutes.
This is the measurement for Kailash.164
In India, it should be known that on each day and night there is an increase or decrease of two minutes.
“Your assertions, therefore, contradict these quotes.” There is no contradiction.
The increases and decreases of the solar days in the six lands that we have stated above are divisions of increase and decrease in daytime and nighttime between the limit of one passage and the limit of the other, whose times in hours and so forth are correct figures obtained by dividing by the 182½ solar days that exist between one limit and the other.
Therefore they are correct as measurements of daily increase and decrease. The increase and decrease of three minutes and four breaths for each day in Himālaya as mentioned in the Great Commentary is an approximation. Concerning the three minutes and two breaths in Kailash and the two minutes in India,  these increases have been calculated by dividing by the 180 zodiacal days165 that exist between one limit and the other. This results in three minutes and two breaths in Kailash and two minutes in India. These were taught, therefore, with convenience in mind.
Therefore the calculations of those that have led to a chart difference of two breaths each day from India to Himālaya cannot possibly be correct. That has been a general explanation. If it is explained astronomically, then at the moment of the mean sun’s arrival in Aries, the days of the six lands at their direct centers are thirty hours long, and the nights are thirty hours long.
All six lands thereby share the equinox. From then on individual daytimes in each of the six lands increase in length daily until the mean sun arrives in Taurus, when in India the length of daytime is thirty-one hours. In Tibet it is thirty-one hours, six minutes, and four breaths.
In Khotan it is thirty-one hours and fifteen minutes.
In China it is thirty-one hours, twenty-five minutes, four breaths, and 2/7 of a breath.
In Kailash daytime is thirty-one hours and forty minutes, and in Himālaya it is thirty-two hours.
Likewise, at the moment of the mean sun’s arrival in Gemini, daytime in India is thirty-two hours.
In Tibet it is thirty-two hours, thirteen minutes, and two breaths;
in Khotan it is thirty-two hours and thirty minutes;
in China it is thirty-two hours, fifty-one minutes, two breaths, and 4/7 of a breath.
In Kailash it is thirty-three hours and twenty minutes, and in Himālaya it is thirty-four hours.
The arrival of the sun in Cancer is the day of its northern limit at the direct center of the six lands, and the length of daytime has been explained previously. The reasons why, on the same day in each of the six lands, the duration of the sun varies can be explained using the day on which the sun has reached its northern limit as an example.
When the sun arrives above the meridian of the central sector of the east at the time of the mean sun arriving in Aries, it is the beginning of morning at the center of the six lands in the central southern sector, and when it arrives above the meridian of the central sector of the west, it is the end of the afternoon. This is true for all six lands.
Then the sun moves steadily north until it reaches its northern limit. When the sun on that day arrives at a point one hour and thirty minutes east of the meridian of the central sector of the east, it is the beginning of morning in the center of India.
When the sun arrives at a point one hour thirty minutes west of the meridian of the central sector of the west, it is the end of the afternoon in India. Therefore the time from its rising in the east until it arrives at the direct center of India is sixteen hours and thirty minutes of morning.
From then until the sun sets is sixteen hours and thirty minutes of afternoon.
This makes thirty-three hours total.
At the center of Tibet, when the sun arrives at a point one hour and forty minutes east of the meridian of the central sector of the east, morning begins.
When it arrives at a similar point west of the central sector of the west, afternoon ends. Therefore, from the moment of its appearance until the sun reaches the direct center of Tibet, it is morning, and a total of sixteen hours and forty minutes passes.
From then until sunset is afternoon, and a total of sixteen hours and forty minutes also passes. Putting these two sums together, daytime in Tibet becomes thirty-three hours and twenty minutes. In the center of Khotan, when the sun arrives at a point one hour, fifty-two minutes, and three breaths east of the meridian of the central sector of the east, morning begins, and when the sun arrives at a similar point west of the meridian of central sector of the west, afternoon ends. Therefore, from the point of its rising until the sun reaches the direct center of Khotan, it is morning, and sixteen hours, fifty-two minutes, and three breaths will have passed. From then until sunset is afternoon, and the same number of hours will pass.
Morning and afternoon added together make daytime in Khotan, at that particular time, thirty-two hours and forty-five minutes long. In the center of China, when the sun arrives at a point two hours, eight minutes, three breaths, and 3/7 of a breath east of the meridian of the central sector of the east, morning begins, and when it arrives at a similar point west of the central sector of the west, afternoon ends.
Therefore, from the moment of the sun’s rising until it reaches the direct center of China, it is morning, and seventeen hours, eight minutes, three breaths, and 3/7 of a breath will pass.
From then until sunset is afternoon, and that same number of hours will pass.
Adding together the times of morning and afternoon produces a total of thirty-four hours, seventeen minutes, and 6/7 of a breath. This is the length of daytime in China at that time. In the center of Kailash, when the sun arrives at a point two hours and thirty minutes east of the meridian of the central sector of the east, morning begins, and its arrival at a similar point west of the meridian of the central sector of the west marks the end of afternoon.
Therefore, from the moment of the sun’s rising in the east until its arrival at the direct center of Kailash, it is morning, and seventeen hours and thirty minutes will pass.
From there until it sets, it is afternoon, and seventeen hours and thirty minutes will have passed.
The times of morning and afternoon added together come to thirty-five hours, which is the length of daytime when the sun reaches its northern limit at the direct center of Kailash.
At the center of Himālaya, when the sun arrives at a point three hours east of the meridian of the central sector of the east, morning begins, and when the sun arrives at a point three hours west of the central sector of the west, afternoon ends.
Applying the same calculations as above, and totaling morning and afternoon times, produces a figure of thirty-six hours, which is the length of daytime at the center of Himālaya on the day of the sun’s northern limit. Therefore the reasons for the individual and differing lengths of daytime on the day of the sun’s northern limit at the direct centers of the six lands are the differing positions of sunrise and sunset, as explained.
If the times or positions of rising and the times or positions of setting were all the same, and none were earlier or later, then the reason for the differing lengths of daytime would have to be put down to the speed of the sun over the six lands.
This would not be a suitable reason, because on a single base, the centers of the six lands, for a time that is the duration of a whole day, a single sun disk cannot be validly perceived166 as moving quickly over one land and slowly over another land.
There is an excellent presentation of this in the Puṇḍarīka Transmission, where it explains that, as the mean sun arrives at  each of the twelve houses in turn, the length of daytime differs at the center of Kailash because of the different positions of rising and setting, thereby producing earlier and later sunrises and sunsets. With this and our rather brief explanation, one can know how to apply it to the times of the mean sun arriving in the other houses at the remaining five lands. Most scholars of the past  maintained that at any of the centers of the six lands of the central sector of the south, regardless of the mean sun’s position in any of the houses, morning begins when the disk of the sun arrives at the direct center of the central sector of the east.
Therefore morning at the direct center of India, for example, on the central sector of the south corresponds exactly with noon at the direct center of the central sector of the east.
Similarly noon at the center of the central sector of the south and morning at the center of the central sector of the west occur at the same time. The same processes are applied to the other sectors.
Also, while they accept that six lagna167 occur during the day and six occur at night, they assert that three will always occur in the morning and three in the afternoon.
Others 168 take these assertions as a basis, and by doing so come to the conclusion that a clockwise movement of the four seasons is wrong. They assert, therefore, a counterclockwise movement.
However this is refuted in the Lamp Illuminating Clockwise Occurence,169 as a study of this text will reveal.
They all maintain that whenever the sun arrives at the meridian of the central sector of the east, it will always be the beginning of morning at the direct center of the central southern sector, and that whenever it arrives at the meridian of the central western sector, it will be the end of afternoon.
They also assert that afternoon on the meridian of the central eastern sector and morning on the meridian of the central southern sector are at all times of the same duration.
These assertions contradict logic, because it would follow that at the time of the mean sun’s arrival in the house of Aries, which corresponds to the spring equinox at the meridian of the central southern sector, afternoon on the meridian of the central eastern sector at a point corresponding to Kailash and afternoon on the meridian of the central eastern sector at a point corresponding to India would be of the same length.
This is because, firstly, at that time afternoon on the meridian of the central eastern sector at a point corresponding to Kailash and morning on the meridian of Kailash would be of the same duration.
Secondly, at that particular time, morning on the central meridian of  Kailash and morning on the meridian of India are of the same length, and thirdly, morning on the central meridian of India and afternoon on the meridian of the central eastern sector at a point corresponding to India would also be of the same length.
The first and third of these reasons you must evidently accept.170 The middle reason is consistent with the facts and must be accepted, because when the disk of the sun arrives above the meridian of the central eastern sector at the time of the spring equinox of the meridian of the central southern sector, it is the simultaneous beginning of morning at the meridians of Kailash and India.
Moreover, when the disk of the sun arrives over the meridian of the central southern sector, you accept that it is noon at the meridians of both Kailash and India.
If it asserted that the original consequence is correct, that these two places would indeed have afternoons of the same length, then it would further follow that at the time of the spring equinox on the meridian of the central southern sector, a point on the meridian of the central eastern sector corresponding to Kailash and a point on the meridian of the central eastern sector corresponding to India would have daytime of equal length, because at the time of the spring equinox on the meridian of the central southern sector, it must be accepted that these two points would have mornings of equal length, and it is accepted that afternoons are also of equal length.
This consequence cannot be correct, because at the time of the spring equinox on the meridian of the central southern sector, the sun has reached its northern limit on the meridian of the central eastern sector.
Therefore, at a point on the meridian of the central eastern sector corresponding to Kailash, daytime is thirty-five hours, and at a point on the meridian of the central eastern sector corresponding to India, daytime is thirty-three hours. That was the point made by the previous explanations.
Therefore it should be known that within the six lands of Himālaya and so forth, and the corresponding regions in the twelve sectors, the varying lengths of day and night throughout the sun’s northward and southward passages are due solely to the different positions of sunrise and sunset.
Because of the same reason, it should be known that the appearance times of the houses also vary.
To explain that briefly, the Great Commentary says on the sixty-third verse:
Now by dividing the continent of Kailash, the appearance times of the twelve houses are discussed: “The house of Aries is in minutes.” This means that concerning the house of Aries, from the time of its arising to the end of its arising, the number of minutes is space, nine, hands, which means ninety more than two hundred.171
This and further quotes speak of the appearance times of the houses.
Using the direct center of Kailash at the meridian of the central southern sector as a basis, the appearance times of the houses, as the Great Commentary says, are 290 minutes172 for Aries, 260 minutes for Taurus, 200 minutes for Gemini, 300 for Cancer, 360 for Leo, and 390 for Virgo.
The appearance times for the remaining six, Libra and so forth, are in reverse order, as this diagram will show:173
Aquarius
Capricorn
Sagittarius
The durations of six houses at night and the durations of six in daytime align perfectly with the length of day and night at any time of year.
However, you might wonder, “This is true when the sun is at the cusps of the signs, but how would they align when the sun is halfway through the house of Aries, for example?” This will be explained.
First calculate how many zodiacal days have passed since the mean sun arrived in that particular house. Then divide the appearance time of that house by thirty and multiply the result by the number of zodiac days that have passed since the mean sun arrived in that house. Subtract that figure from the appearance time of the particular house the mean sun inhabits and begin the counting from the remainder. Include the appearance times of the next six houses, and add this to the result obtained by dividing by thirty the appearance time of the seventh house on from the house inhabited by the mean sun, and, as before, multiplying it by the number of zodiac days passed since the sun occupied that house. This is the length of daytime at that particular time.
Similarly divide by thirty the appearance time of the seventh house on from the house occupied by the mean sun, multiply it as before, subtract that figure from the appearance time of this seventh house, and, counting from the remainder, include the appearance time of the other six houses, plus the result obtained by dividing the appearance time of the house occupied by the mean sun by thirty and multiplying it as before. This is the length of the nighttime at that particular time.
In the tantra and commentary these appearance times are taught using the direct center of Kailash of the central southern sector as a basis.
By the same reasoning used there, appearance times on the other sectors can also be shown.
As depicted above, the appearance times of the house on Kailash are set as 290 minutes, 260, 200, 300, 360, and 390.
On the basis of each sector being at the beginning of its own spring equinox, the order of the above appearance times on the second sector clockwise from the central southern sector, which is the western sector of the south, at the direct center of a region corresponding to Kailash, begins with Taurus for the first six houses, and then proceeds in reverse order for the six houses beginning with Scorpio.174 Likewise, on the remaining ten sectors at the center of a point corresponding to Kailash, when the mean sun has just entered the house for that sector’s spring equinox, the house that heralds the spring equinox is the first of the six houses of forward order, and the house of the autumn equinox is the first of the six houses of reverse order.
From the corresponding figures the lengths of day and night can be known.
In this way the differing appearance times for the house in each of the six lands and twelve sectors account for the lengths of day and night.
This can be illustrated using the center of Kailash as an example. The beginning of Aries appears over the meridian of the central sector of the east.
If the tail end of Aries appeared there also, then the Aries house would last for 300 minutes.
The tail end of Aries borders Taurus, and therefore the place for Taurus to rise is from a point east of the meridian of the central eastern sector representing the time the sun would take to travel for fifty minutes.175 This means that the appearance time of Aries’s house is 290 minutes. Similarly, the beginning of Taurus rises in the east at the place where the tail end of Aries rises.
If the tail end of Taurus rose in the same place, then its appearance time would be 300 minutes.
By rising east of the rising position of the beginning of Taurus, which is of a larger area than the end, its duration is 260 minutes.
In this way the different rising places of the beginnings and ends of the houses account for the different appearance times of the house.
The sun lying within the stars of a particular house will also rise from the rising place of those stars. Therefore the different durations of the house account for the different rising and setting positions of the sun in the east and west.
In the sixty-third verse of the Realms chapter of the Great Commentary it says:
The appearance times of the house lessen and lengthen day and night, due to the sun’s position.176
This requires a more detailed explanation, but because it would entail far too much explanation, this will have to do. The gola of the earth:
Emergence of the seasons
The Great Commentary says in the sixth verse of the Realms chapter:
The sun dwells in one of the houses, Aries and so on, and on the twelve sectors the six seasons, the twelve months, and the twenty-four sides177 are formed from the orbiting of the wheel of houses.178 As this and further quotations explain, when the sun dwells in the house of Aries, it is spring in both the eastern and central sectors of the south.
At the same time, proceeding counterclockwise, in the western and central sectors of the east, it is the hot season.
In the eastern sector of the east and in the western sector of the north, it is summer.
In the central and eastern sector of the north, it is autumn. In the western and central sector of the west, it is early winter, and in the eastern sector of the west and western sector of the south, it is late winter. This is how six seasons are formed upon the twelve sectors with the sun inhabiting the house of Aries.
Similarly, when the sun dwells in Taurus, it is spring in the western and central southern sectors.
In the eastern sector of the south and the western sector of the east, it is the hot season;
in the central and eastern sectors of the east it is summer;
in the western and central sectors of the north it is autumn; in the eastern sector of the north and the western sector of the west, it is early winter;
and in the central and eastern sectors of the west, it is late winter.
This formula should be similarly applied to the sun dwelling in the other houses.179 The way in which the seasons are divided into four is as follows.
When the sun dwells in Aries, it is spring in the three southern sectors, summer in the three eastern sectors, autumn in the three northern sectors, and winter in the three western sectors.
Similarly, when the sun dwells in Taurus, it is spring in the eastern sector of the west, in the western sector of the south, and in the central sector of the south.
Then, proceeding counterclockwise, it is summer in the next three sectors, autumn in the following three, and winter in the last three. This formula should be applied to the times of the sun dwelling in the other houses.
Furthermore the formation, from the sun dwelling in a particular house, of the twelve smaller divisions of the seasons on the twelve sectors, such as middle spring and so forth, is as previously explained. Resolving Contradictions between Kālacakra and Abhidharma Cosmology
Refuting any contradictions between the presentation of the world in the Kālacakra and that of the Abhidharma texts This has three headings:
1.The points of doubt
2.How such doubts are expressed
3.Commentary on the text that dispels such doubts The points of doubt
The presentation of the world and its inhabitants found in the Abhidharma and the presentation of the world and its inhabitants as detailed here in the Kālacakra are very different.
Here the differences in the presentation of the world will be briefly set out.
The relevant presentations in the tantra and the Great Commentary are as previously explained.
The way it is presented in the Abhidharma is as follows:
In the physical world below the realms of desire, the measurements of the air mandala:
one million, six hundred thousand, and beyond number.
The water and so forth, a hundred thousand times eleven,
and a thousand times twenty.
Outside the measurements are eight hundred thousand.
The remainder is of gold.
Across the mandalas of water and gold
is a hundred thousand times twelve,
three thousand, and four hundred and fifty.180
Therefore, according to this and other quotes from the Abhidharmakośa, the basic foundation of the billion four-continent worlds is the air mandala.
It extends to yojana “beyond number,”181 and its depth is 1,600,000 yojana. Upon that air mandala, as foundations of each of the four-continent worlds, are individual water and gold mandalas.
The water mandala is 800,000 yojana deep, and the gold mandala is 320,000 yojana deep.
Both the water and the gold mandala are 1,203,450 yojana in diameter, while the circumference of each is three times that number. The measurements of the foundations, therefore, are very different from those of the Kālacakra.
On the differences regarding Meru and the continents upon that mandala foundation, the Abhidharmakośa states:
Meru is of four precious gems;
eighty thousand under water, and as much as it is submerged, so above for eighty thousand yojana.182 Thus Meru has four sides and is made of four precious gems. The east is of silver, the south of lapis lazuli, the west of red crystal, and the north of gold.
Each side is also the color of these gems. Meru sinks eighty thousand yojana into the sea, while eighty thousand yojana are above sea level. That is the Abhidharma explanation.
Here, however,  Meru is taught as being circular, black in the east, red in the south, golden in the west, and white in the north, and while its height is taught as being one hundred thousand yojana.183
Again, the Abhidharmakośa says, “Yugandhara, Īṣādhāra, and Khadira ka,”184 and so on. Also, “In between them, at each of the seven, an ocean,”185 and so on lists the seven golden mountains and the seven bountiful lakes. Among them no continents are found.
The shapes of the golden mountains and bountiful lakes are also said to be square.
Here in the Kālacakra, a continent is located between each mountain range and lake to form the seven continents, whose shapes are all circular.
The Abhidharmakośa continues:
The remainder is the outer ocean,
of 322,000 yojana.
Within that, Jambudvīpa of three sides.186 The outer Black Iron Mountains surround the the outer ocean, which contains the four continents and the eight lesser continents located at the four cardinal directions and in the eight intermediate directions, and which are piled into the ocean depths like heaps of rice.
In the Kālacakra there are no seas between the Śīta Mountains and the water mandala, and the area of the circular earth mandala is divided into twelve connecting continents or sectors. Furthermore the Abhidharmakośa says:
Under this, at twenty thousand,
the Hell of No Respite, and then no more,
and above that, the seven hells.187 This states that the lowest hell begins twenty thousand yojana beneath Jambudvīpa.
Moreover, the hot hells, cold hells, and neighboring hells are spoken of as being directly below this continent of Jambudvīpa. The Abhidharmakośa continues: On life span within the hells,
one day in Reviving Hell, and so forth,
is a lifetime of the desire gods.
Life spans, therefore, mirror those of the gods.
Those of Blazing and of Hell of no Respite
are an intermediate eon.188
This is the Abhidharma explanation of the life spans within the hells. From a store of sesame seeds,
every hundred years one seed is taken until empty.
Such time is the life span in the Hell of Blisters.
The others are this times twenty.189 That is the explanation of life span within the cold hells.
Here in the Kālacakra, the lowest hell is at a depth of 200,000 yojana from Greater Jambudvīpa, while the hot and cold hells are beneath Meru and the mountains, continents, and oceans of the earth mandala.
Similarly, concerning the life spans of those within the hell realms, the first hell has a life span of one small eon, the second and third of an intermediate eon, the fourth and fifth of a supreme eon, the sixth and seventh of a great eon, while the eighth is taught as having the life span the length of a world realm’s existence.
As for the number of hells, no more than eight are mentioned, while the Abhidharmakośa and other texts talk of eighteen hells.
In this way the Abhidharma and the Kālacakra presentations of the inner and outer worlds do not agree at all on shape, size, number, and so forth.
Also the Kālacakra presentation of channels, winds, and their movements within the human body differ from those of other tantras. These are the points of doubt. How such doubts are expressed
Some Indian scholars and even some Tibetan scholars maintain that the Kālacakra is not a perfect tantra, citing its contradiction with the Abhidharma and other tantras as their reason, and assert that the compilers and composers of its commentaries were not manifestations of Mañjuśrī, Avalo kiteśvara, Vajragarbha, Vajrapāṇi, and so forth.
In the Sheaves of Oral Transmission it says:
The knowledgeable and others have said that in the Kālacakra and those commentaries that follow it, there are many presentations in contradiction with the Three Vehicles, and that those responsible for these texts, possessing the names Yaśas, Puṇḍarīka, Vajragarbha, and Avalokiteśvara, are not bodhisattvas at all.190
In this quote, “the knowledgeable” refers to the master Śāntipa, and “others” refers to other Indians.
Tibetans who maintain this position include Chomden Rikral and Düpa Chenpo Ngok.
The venerable Rendawa said, “Like straightening a crooked tree,”191 and produced many consequences for the apparent contradictions with other tantras.
Abhayākaragupta and some others maintain that the tantra and commentaries of Kālacakra are valid texts but that their presentations on the world and its inhabitants that contradict other tantras require interpretation.
Sheaves of Oral Transmission says:
Those parts taught in the Kālacakra that do not contradict other tantras, I follow as texts of our own scripture.
Some, which are contradictory because they follow the inclinations of certain disciples, have been resolved.
As to the rest, although the contradictions have not been resolved, there are no faults in them at all. This has been explained at great length and so they are perfectly acceptable.192 This means that whatever is taught in the tantra and commentaries and does not contradict the Guhyasamāja and others can be taken literally.
Some topics, which do not actually contradict other tantras but which may appear as contradictory to the minds of some disciples, have been resolved.
The rest, such as the presentations of the world, its inhabitants, and so forth, may contain unresolved contradictions, but because they have been explained previously in great detail as topics in need of interpretation, they are perfectly acceptable.
When is something explained as being in need of interpretation?
Sheaves of Oral Transmission, prior to the previous quote, says: In Kālacakra the space mandala is spoken of separately, and is there to lead disciples such as Sūryaratha and others who cling to tīrthika views to the definitive meaning. It is solely in need of interpretation and intentionally equivocal, like the teaching on the arrangement of the three world realms in the upper regions of Meru, asserted by those who follow Varāha,193 and so forth.194
Therefore, in the Kālacakra, the assertion that the space element wind195 is separate from the other wind mandalas, such as the life-sustaining wind and so forth, and flows through the nostrils during normal existence requires interpretation. This indicates that the teachings on the presentation of the world also require interpretation.
With this in mind they have “been explained at great length, and so they are perfectly acceptable.” Some Tibetan lamas maintain that the teachings from the Kālacakra are definitive, while those from the Abhidharma tradition were taught to accord with the minds of the lower vehicles and are therefore provisional and not to be taken literally.
To those who do not accept the Kālacakra as being valid at all, who talk of contradictions in the tantra and commentary and put forward proofs to dismiss it as an impure tantra, countless counterarguments dispelling their contradictions and refuting such proofs, as well as presentations that diverge from descriptions of world realms in the Abhidharma, in the Five Categories, and in the sutras, can be found in Illuminating Reality, an extensive explanation of the tantra and commentary.
Moreover commentary passages clearly show that the description of a world realm in the Kālacakra and in the Abhidharma tradition can both be accepted literally. This will be explained. It may be wondered if those, such as Śāntipa, who state that the tantra and commentaries of Kālacakra are flawed texts accrue the heavy nonvirtue of abandoning the dharma?
They do not.
In the Great Commentary, in the Supreme and Unchanging Gnosis summary of the Gnosis chapter, it says:
If the worldly go to hell through disparagement, then as all holders of views disparage each other, all holders of views will go to hell because of their disparagement.
If that is so, this contradicts all valid scripture and tenets, and some might think that all ethics and all morality are meaningless.196 This doubt is raised, and the text continues with an answer:
Therefore I will explain.
The claim by the foolish that valid scripture and so forth would be contradicted is not so.
Because the intentions of holders of views are to examine meanings.
Holders of views who express their views to one another are not at fault in their views, because these are states of mind that arise from examination of meaning,  and there are no thoughts of harming sentient beings but only thoughts of helping them.197
As this quote explains, Śāntipa, Chomden Rikral, and others are only examining the meanings of scripture, and their thoughts are totally focused on the benefit of the doctrine and sentient beings.
Commentary on the text that dispels such doubts
The passage to be explained runs from “Here worldly convention” up to “The Conqueror spoke of the dimensions of the world and the dimensions of the body for the purpose of the mandala.” This passage dispels any notion that the teachings on the measurements and shape of this four- continent world contradict the presentation of this four-continent world as found in the Abhidharma tradition.
The Great Commentary says:
The Conqueror said that the size of a world realm was more than 3,600,000 yojana and that the size of a world realm was 400,000 yojana. Some will ask, “Does the Conqueror speak the truth?”198
In the Abhidharmakośa it says: Across the mandalas of water and gold
is a hundred thousand times twelve,
three thousand, and four hundred and fifty.199 This means that multiplying by three200 the distance directly across the water and gold mandalas that act as the foundation of this four-continent world results in a circumference of 10,350 more than 3,600,000. If this figure and the figure of four hundred thousand yojana were both spoken by the Conqueror, a doubt could arise as to whether the Conqueror was speaking the truth.
Therefore the text from this part of the commentary sets out to dispel any contradiction between these two differing descriptions of the size and shape of this one four-continent world. The text at this point can be explained in detail.
“Ultimately,” or in reality, it is not possible to conclusively measure this four-continent world exclusively according to the measurements found in either the Abhidharma or the Kālacakra.
The descriptions here of the four-continent world are “mere worldly conventions.”201 The differing types of karma of sentient beings of differing dispositions have brought into existence differing shapes and sizes for this four-continent world, and as they exist, so the Conqueror taught sentient beings the measurements of this world realm in accord with their differing dispositions, and as he taught them, so they appeared in accord with their variety of karma.
How do the differing shapes and sizes of this four-continent world arise from the differing types of karma of sentient beings?
“By the power of virtue” within virtuous sentient beings, some parts of this four-continent world are blessed with all things pleasant, and “by the power of demerit” in those of nonvirtue, other parts of the world are devoid of happiness and well-being.
It may be that the personal results202 of those with meritorious karma and of those whose karma lacks such merit manifest as individual environments for the experience of happiness and suffering, but for this one four-continent world, there are two completely different presentations of shape and size. One is according to Abhidharma, and the other is according to Kālacakra. How do these two contrasting presentations arise from the differing karma of sentient beings?
This is explained by an example, beginning with the words “In a cave of five cubits.” In a cave five cubits in height, length, and width lives “one without attachment,” i.e., an arhat or a powerful bodhisattva.
In that cave this person is devoted to accumulating merit and wisdom, and by the power of such devotion and by the force of magical powers, a universal emperor arrives with his vast army and enters the small cave.
At that time no one enlarged the cave, nor were the universal emperor and his armies squashed together in the cave.
This is a phenomenon validly perceived as existing, and although such an accomplishment seems impossible, in actuality it is not, because it is brought about by the inconceivable power of the mighty bodhisattva’s or arhat’s merit and wisdom.
In the same way, on the one Meru of this four-continent world realm, two completely different sets of shape and size measurements, one from the Abhidharma and one from the Kālacakra, can be validly perceived to exist. When the universal emperor and his armies entered the five-cubit cave, they were not crowded together nor did the cave grow larger. Such a noncontradictory occurrence was due to the might of the bodhisattva’s or arhat’s merit and wisdom. Similarly, on this one four-continent world, one set of measurements of shape and size as taught in the Abhidharma and a completely different set as taught in the Kālacakra can exist on the one Meru.
This congruent and noncontradictory occurrence is due to the separate types of karma of the intended disciples of the Abhidharma and tantras such as Guhyasamāja on the one hand and the intended disciples of the Kālacakra on the other.
Just as the merit and wisdom of that bodhisattva or arhat are inconceivable, so too are the powers or capabilities of the common karma of sentient beings.
In the Abhidharmasamuccaya it says:
The karma that produces various external phenomena is inconceivable.
The karma connected with jewels, mantra, medicine, and secret lore is inconceivable.
The karma of the powers of every yogi is inconceivable.
The karma of the might of bodhisattvas is inconceivable.203
However, if the world taught in the Abhidharma and the world taught in the Kālacakra are equal in the sense that they both exist, then it should be perfectly acceptable for the world with the Abhidharma measurements to be taught here in the Kālacakra.
So what special reason is there for teaching a world system contradictory to the Abhidharma? The purpose of the teaching of a four-continent world realm of four hundred thousand yojana as found in the Kālacakra and yet in contradiction to the Abhidharma is found in the words of the Great Commentary, “As without, so within the body.”204 This means that this external four-continent world realm is a base to be purified by meditating upon the mandalas that correspond to this world realm.
The body, whose measurements correspond to the measurements of the world, is also to be purified by meditating on the mandala circles that correspond to the measurements of the body.
In the Great Commentary it says, “The body is said to be the mandala.”205 Therefore external Meru, in measurements that are mere worldly convention, is one hundred thousand yojana high. The height of the human spine is one cubit. This makes the height of the body four cubits.
The height of Meru is one hundred thousand yojana. This makes the height of a four-continent world realm four hundred thousand yojana.
If this four-continent world were to be explained in the Kālacakra as being other than four hundred thousand yojana, as taught in the Abhidharma tradition, then the correspondence indicated by the quote, “As without, so within the body,” as previously explained, would not hold.
This is because Meru as explained in the Abhidharma tradition is not a hundred thousand yojana, and this would not correspond to the one cubit height of the spine.
Because of this, the measurements of a four-continent world realm here in the Kālacakra are taught conventionally to be four hundred thousand yojana, and as they are taught, so they exist.
However, it has been stated:
As gold is burned and rubbed,
my word is to be accepted by examining well,
not out of respect.206
Good gold when burned turns red, when cut it shows white, and when rubbed it turns yellow;
in these ways it should be tested. Similarly the words of the Buddha should undergo three tests, and when a teaching is seen to be pure, it should be accepted as valid, not merely out of respect or because of bias. However it is not the case here that we can say with valid and deep analysis that the Conqueror saw and ascertained this four-continent world realm to be solely four hundred thousand yojana and therefore spoke and declared this measurement in the Kālacakra.
This is because, as previously explained, there are many differing measurements and shapes of this four-continent world due to the power of the various types of karma of sentient beings. The measurements of this four-continent world are not exclusively as taught here in the Kālacakra. However the teaching and assertion of a 400,000-yojana world here plays a special role in the creation of merit and wisdom for entering the generation stage and then the completion stage. This explains the affirming purpose for teaching a four-continent world realm of four hundred thousand yojana in the Kālacakra.
The negating purpose is to refute the notion held by Sūryaratha and others that this single dominion of Brahmā covers an area of ten million yojana.
In the Kālacakra the presentations of the measurements of a world realm together with descriptions of the movements of its five planets, its astronomy, and its zodiac of the houses and so forth, are not only for the purposes of inner and outer application, but they have another purpose.
The thinking of the Abhidharmakośa and that of the Veda tenets are not in agreement on various features of this four-continent world realm.
One of those disagreements is the false assertion made by followers of the Vedas that the dominion of Brahmā, this sole four-continent world, is of an area of ten million yojana. Sūryaratha and others cling to this assertion, and by reversing that, and in order to fully ripen them, this measurement of the dominion of Brahmā is destroyed.
Therefore, “having seen the Buddhist Abhidharma” teachings on the four-continent world,  do not think that the Kālacakra explanation is mistaken, with its measurements of four hundred thousand yojana, because the movements of the planets, the astronomy, and the zodiac of the houses as they are explained here can be actually confirmed by the charts.
However207 the Conqueror taught in the Abhidharmakośa that the measurements of this four-continent world realm were “across the mandalas of water and gold a hundred thousand times twelve,”208 which, as previously explained, results in a circumference of over 3,600,00 yojana.
Similarly, in the Kālacakra, he taught this four-continent world realm to have a measurement of four hundred thousand yojana. If that is so, does not the Conqueror speak falsely, as some assert?
The Conqueror did teach different and individual measurements and shapes in the Abhidharma sutras and in the Kālacakra, but the wise who hold to the law of cause and effect should not believe in utterances such as “The Conqueror speaks falsely,” because, as explained previously, on this one four-continent world realm there are intended disciples of the Abhidharma, Guhyasamāja, and so forth, and intended disciples of the Kālacakra.
These disciples have different kinds of karma, and with these types of karma as dominant conditions,209 different measurements and shapes appear, and the Buddha taught in accord with such appearances as they appeared to the minds of sentient beings.
It might be wondered to what particular text the Abhidharma mentioned here210 refers?
Lamas of the past say that the Abhidharma composed by the master Vasubandhu was written about three hundred years after the Great Commentary, and therefore it is not the Abhidharma referred to here.
So which is it then?
They maintain that it either refers to the Seven Great Texts of the Abhidharma or to the Great Abhidharma of Specific Explanation, which is an extensive and detailed exposition of the meanings of the Seven Great Texts of the Abhidharma and is also known as Abhidharma.
However the phrase from the Great Commentary “having seen the Buddhist Abhidharma” looks like a prophecy. Also the Abhidharma of the master Vasubandhu is well established throughout Tibet and other lands, and I wonder if the noble Avalokiteśvara211 was not thinking of a text known as the “Abhidharma” to be written in the future by Ācārya Vasubandhu? It might also be wondered if, in order to destroy or reverse the wrong view, held by Sūryaratha and others, that this four-continent world covers an area of ten million yojana, it would surely have been sufficient to teach the measurements as found in the Seven Great Texts of the Abhidharma.
What need was there to categorically state the measurements found in the Kālacakra?
In order to destroy this wrong view, it was necessary to state the measurements of this world realm together with its planets, its calculations, and its zodiac, because the movements of the five planets, their calculations, the way the circle of houses revolves, and the way the sun and moon move within it are taught in the Kālacakra and are ascertained by an earth-drawn chart. When this happens a conviction is born that these teachings can be held as being literally true, which in turn produces a conviction in the measurements of this world, and so the wrong view will be reversed. Otherwise, by just teaching the presentation of the world as explained in the Abhidharma, it would be difficult to destroy such wrong views as those held by Sūryaratha and others.
The Root Tantra says212 that “dispositions of sentient beings are varied / they know of various tenets” such as ours and others.
“They follow various paths” and doctrines taught by others.
“Proud of their knowledge” of phenomena, “the conceited will never come / under the might of the omniscient one / unless presented with reasons” that prove and disprove and that create conviction regarding our tenets and those of others. But surely it is wrong to teach something that does not validly exist instead of teaching the validly established truth?
That is not necessarily so.
A butcher searching for animals that he will definitely kill may ask someone if he has seen the animal he is going to kill.
Moved by compassion for those to be killed, the person will reply that they have not seen it even though they have. By such a lie the animals he is seeking to kill and the would-be killer himself are both benefited, and this lie becomes a cause for great merit.
If emptiness is truthfully taught to someone unfit for teachings on profound emptiness, such a teaching would harm that person, and those truthful words would become a cause for the Hell of No Respite and so forth.
One of the root downfalls of a bodhisattva is “Teaching emptiness to those who have not prepared their minds.”213
The verse beginning “Miserly hungry ghosts”214 expresses the inconceivable potential of the karma of sentient beings.
By the force of their miserly nongiving, sentient beings are born as hungry ghosts. If they were to enter a house fully stocked with food and drink, by the force of that karma they would see it as a mountain totally bare of food and drink.
For those wrongdoers born into hell, a beautiful house assumes the form of sharp weapons and sharp leaves and so forth.
Similarly the verse beginning “Having gained the siddhi of the world below”215 teaches the inconceivable power of the yogis who have gained the powers to make use of the worlds below the earth.
They possess the power to travel to the cities of the goddesses and clearly see this solid and firm earth as hollow.
These verses are from the Root Tantra.
The following passage beginning “Therefore the measurements of the world” gives a summary of the above explanation.
“Therefore,” in keeping with the previous reasons, “the words that the Conqueror spoke on the measurements of the world” were spoken because sentient beings have gathered various types of karma, and in tune with that karma, “each sentient being has predispositions in their minds by whose power” the world appears in many differing aspects. In keeping with those appearances the Tathāgata likewise taught the measurements of the world, but “nowhere did the Tathāgata look at the measurements of the world under the power of attachment and speak on them from” a false and dual appearance of “internal subject and external object,” without regard to the way the world appears to sentient beings. This has been a detailed explanation of this part of the commentary. To summarize:
it is not right to use one set of measurements of the world found in the Abhidharma or in the Kālacakra to refute the other. The Abhidharma explanation is used by Ācārya Nāgārjuna and others when explaining the outside world as a purification base for the generation and completion stages of Guhyasamāja.
If there were no outside world with no such measurements, the path of purification would also be invalid.
Similarly, if there were no outside world with measurements as explained in the Kālacakra, it would not be valid as the purification base for the path, as expressed in the quote, “As without, so within the body.”
The Inner World of Sentient Beings The Development of the Body A presentation of the inner world of sentient beings This has two main headings: 1.The development of the body of a sentient being
2.Phenomena supported by the body The development of the body of a sentient being This has three outlines:
1.The bardo of the being about to take birth 2.How consciousness enters the blood and fluid after bardo has ceased 3.Development in the womb The bardo of the being about to take birth The Abhidharmakośa says:
“With bodily form of the prior-state existence.”1 Also:
“Seeing with unfettered eyes those of similar kind.” And further:
“Sense powers complete and unobstructed.”2 The bardo body therefore is taught to be a body composed of subtle particles, and whose shape and form is a visual form source.3 The Abhidharmasamuccaya also talks of “where the bodily form will be born,”4 thereby referring to the bodily form of the bardo as a visual form source.
The Great Commentary, in the Supreme and Unchanging Gnosis summary, says:
“At the time of death, the seed possessing the characteristics of the five5 will definitely arise.
Like a body of a dream, the empty body of imprints abandons the composite of subtle particles but does not cease.” The body of imprints formed from the imprints of karma does not cease. Once again it will take hold of a body composed of subtle particles.6 Thus it is stated that the bardo body has left behind the composite of subtle particles.
Great scholars  have also said that the bardo body has the form of a mental phenomena source.7
Taken literally, the above quotes contradict each other.
Whether this is due to individual traditions8 or whether the Kālacakra passage is referring to the absence of the kind of subtle particles of the body of the prior-state existence is something to be examined. How consciousness enters the blood and fluid after bardo has ceased This is under two headings:
1.Defining the entering consciousness
2.How the consciousness enters
Defining the entering consciousness As the bardo is coming to an end, the mind at that time is the very subtle mind of clear light.
That mind and the mind that crosses over into the womb are of preceding and succeeding instants. In this way the mind that has just entered the womb is also the very subtle mind of clear light.
Such a mind exists alongside innate bliss and is known as the foundation consciousness9 and as innate mind.
The Great Commentary, on the fifteenth verse of the Inner chapter, says:
While the consciousness is in the womb, it is the foundation consciousness, a gnosis of the highest bliss.10 And farther on:
Mother, father, and foundation consciousness are one at the time of bliss.11
What is the difference between the foundation consciousness assigned to the mind that has just entered the womb and the foundation consciousness explained as the “foundation of all” by those who assert eight types of consciousnesses?
Generally there are many differing assertions concerning the mind that has just entered the womb.
The Abhidharmakośa says, “Birth existence is with delusion,”12 thereby declaring that the mental consciousness is one of mental affliction.
In the Abhidharmasamuccaya and similar texts, those who assert the collection of eight types of consciousnesses describe it as a foundation consciousness, which is an untaught,13 unobstructed phenomenon and associated with neutral feelings.
Highest tantras, such as the Kālacakra, are in agreement that the clear-light nature of mind is the basis of all things in samsara and nirvana.
This is the clear light of a bardo death, and in the Great Commentary this is referred to as “the foundation.” Death clear light is also referred to as the “foundation” in the Great Commentary on the seventh verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter:
Like this the elements quickly weaken. Then “the mind is the fire at the end of darkness,” which means that the foundation consciousness is placed in the realm of space, in fully aspected forms empty of all objects, dwelling in the middle.14 Therefore, in this tantra and its commentary, the mind that has just crossed over to the womb and the mind of the clear light of death are spoken of as a foundation consciousness. However this is not a foundation consciousness that is distinct from the mental consciousnesses, as is taught by those who assert the eight kinds of consciousness.
That type of foundation consciousness is distinguished by many characteristics, such as being at all times an untaught, unobstructed phenomenon, associated only with neutral feelings, of unclear focus and apprehension.
Moreover the consciousness at the cessation of the bardo and the mind of the clear light of death can become virtuous minds, can become associated with feelings of bliss, and are consciousnesses of a clear focus and apprehension arising from a clarity15 “in the realm of space, in fully aspected forms empty of all objects, dwelling in the middle.” Therefore the thinking behind calling this mind “the foundation” is that it is the foundation for the arising of all things in samsara and nirvana.
As an entity, however, it is a mental consciousness.
The Great Commentary says in the Gnosis chapter:
How does it grasp the womb? Solely as a mental consciousness with the support of bodhicitta.16 This clearly states that the mental consciousness alone, supported by a base of red and white bodhicitta, is the consciousness of conception. How the consciousness enters Generally four places of conception for sentient beings can be ascertained.
They are the womb, heat and moisture, the egg, and miraculous birth.
On miraculous birth the Abhidharmakośa says:
Hell beings, gods, and those between existences are born miraculously.17 Hell, god realms, and the bardo are characterized by taking miraculous birth. The text continues: Hungry ghosts can also
be born from the womb.18 This means that hungry ghosts may be of miraculous birth or womb birth.
For humans and animals, four kinds.19 This states that all four kinds of birth can be found within the human and animal realm.
When describing the four kinds of birth found in the animal realm, the Great Commentary, on the fourth verse of the Realms chapter, says:
“Animals are of four kinds of birth.” Birth from an egg would be for the garuda hawk and others. It is an air-element birthplace.
Birth from a womb includes the mighty elephant and others. It is a fire-element birthplace.
Birth from heat and moisture is for some insects, butterflies, ants, and so forth. It is a water-element birthplace.
Miraculous birth is for trees and is an earth-element birthplace.
Similarly great miraculous birth is a taste birthplace.20 Regarding this quote the noble Kumāramati says: Including trees as animal birth
is a tenet of the Jains.21
Although he is refuting the Great Commentary here, this passage is not actually classifying trees, mountains, and so forth as animal births.
So what is the explanation?
In Kālacakra all existent phenomena are assigned to the five or six elements.
Here, in order to assign the four kinds of birth to five elements, miraculous birth is divided into two types, namely, mere and great. Mere miraculous birth is assigned to the earth element.
“Great miraculous birth” refers to well-known miraculous births, and “taste” refers to the space element.22 Therefore trees and so forth, which mainly grow from earth, are explained as being of miraculous birth, but this does not teach that trees are animal births.
Of the four kinds of birth found in the human realm, birth from egg would be, for example, that of the Sthavirakīrti and Upakīrti.
An example of birth from heat and moisture would be that of King Mūrdhāta.
A miraculous birth would be that of Āryadeva. There are four kinds of birth, and sentient beings are classified into six types, five types, etc.
However here in the Inner chapter, which determines the inner world, the primary ascertainment is that of a sentient being possessed of a womb-born human body of the six elements23 who will meditate in two stages in order to attain the supreme siddhi of enlightenment in this life.
What is the purpose of such an ascertainment?
It is to know and understand the bases of purification for the generation and completion stages as well as the locations for the practice of penetrative focusing in the completion stage.
Therefore the development of a womb-born human body of the six elements is explained. Amid the blood and fluid of mother and father in union arises the mental consciousness of the previous bardo being. This is a very subtle mind of clear light, known as the “foundation.” The consciousness, fluid, and blood are united within the mother’s womb, from which will develop the body of a sentient being.
This agglomeration of fluid, blood, and consciousness dwelling in the mother’s secret lotus24 is supported by the element of earth of the mother’s secret lotus, gathered together by her element of water, matured by her element of fire, made larger by her element of air, and given the room to grow by her element of space in its aspect of empty space within the womb.
The five elements that make up this union of fluid, blood, and consciousness within the womb also perform individual functions.
The earth element gives it weight and solidity, the water element gives it moisture, and it is matured by the fire element.
The element of air agglomeration, which is the seed of the element-originated25 ten winds that will develop in the future, enlarges this agglomeration of fluid, blood, and consciousness.
The element of space provides the room for growth.
Concerning the developmental role of the winds, the Great Commentary says at this point:
The ten great winds, such as the life-sustaining wind, etc., enlarge the form of this seed.26
“Wind” here must refer to the seeds of the ten winds, as mentioned above, because at this particular time the channels for the ten winds have not developed, and if that is so, then of course neither have the winds themselves.
To say that “the ten winds” in the above passage refers to the internal winds of the mother’s body contradicts the Great Commentary in this section when it says, “This speaks of the activity of the seed’s own elements,”27 thereby confirming that this passage is referring to the air element of the seed of fluid and blood itself. Development in the womb
The time from conception in the womb until death is taught in correspondence with the ten avatāra, or incarnations, of Viṣṇu.
These ten, beginning with the fish, are tales of Viṣṇu and can be related in chronological order. Once when the four Vedas had sunk into the ocean, Viṣṇu manifested as a fish and recited them. In the form of a turtle he hoisted up the world and held it there. In the form of a wild pig he crushed the worlds as far as the realms of Brahmā. With his lower half in the form of a man and his upper in the form of a lion, he killed Hiraṇyakaśipu, the king of the asura demons, by tearing out his stomach.
Manifesting as a midget he deceived the demon Bali by taking three steps. Manifesting as Rama of the axe, the son of the Brahmin Jamādagni, he murdered those of the royal kṣatriya caste, such as Arjuna, and put an end to their rule. In his manifestation as Rāma, son of King Daśaratha, his wife was snatched by Rāvaṇa, the ten-throated rakṣās of Lanka, and so accompanied by the monkey Hanuman he defeated the rakṣās.
As Kṛṣṇa he worked for sentient beings in the age of troubles.28 He manifested as Buddha Śākyamuni and purified himself of the former murder of kings.
As Kīrti,29 the son of a Kalkī Brahmin, he will appear in the future and, having tamed many beings, a new era will begin. Concerning the last two avatāra, the Supreme and Unchanging Gnosis summary from the Gnosis chapter says the following: The ninth avatāra of Viṣṇu, the god of wealth, is the Buddha. Viṣṇu will manifest as Buddha Śākyamuni. His purpose will be as follows. In the past, in the realms of the asura, those who were not killed or defeated by the god of wealth will be born as low castes at the time of the Buddha.
In order to send them to hell, he will deceptively refute the doctrine of rituals, and by doing so the extensive words of Bhārata, the words of Gīta,30 and the words of the Veda will be refuted. Having refuted them, he will then teach the lower castes perverted doctrine and expound the ten perfections by saying, “practice the perfection of giving,” and so forth, up to “do not practice the paths of the ten nonvirtuous deeds.”  He will teach the four immeasurables, the abandonment of the ten nonvirtues, and other perverted doctrine. By such teaching, the latent dispositions of the lower castes will be awakened. They will shave their heads and put on the yellow robes to become monks.
These lower castes, who in former times in the land of the asura were not defeated and killed by the wealth god Viṣṇu, will refute the Brahmins. By doing so they will go to hell. Therefore, at the time Viṣṇu manifests as the Buddha, the ordinary lower castes are formerly inhabitants of the land of the asura. In order to send them to hell, Viṣṇu enacts this deception of manifesting as the Buddha.
The tenth avatāra is the lineage bearer. In the land of Shambhala the wealth god Viṣṇu will incarnate as the Brahmin Kīrti, and he will ride a stone horse and with spears of kuśa31 will kill the barbarians and perform the fire offering of “plentiful gold.” Once again the land will become Brahmin.32
According to the Great Commentary these last two incarnations as detailed here are not found in early Vedic texts:
In this way, many false words were written by malicious Brahmins at the time of the Buddha. These are not in early Vedic literature.33
These ten avatāra of Viṣṇu, then, are taught as:
Fish, turtle, and pig,
man-lion and midget,
the two Ramas and Kṛṣṇa,
the Buddha and Kīrti, to make up the ten.34
The accounts of the ten avatāra of Viṣṇu are spoken of in the Great Commentary:
On the outside, the narratives such as that of the fish and others, were written by malicious Brahmin sages to deceive the foolish. Such works are causes that result in hell. These are explained in greater detail in the later section on the supreme and unchanging gnosis.35 Thus the accounts of the ten avatāra as related above are taught to be lies.
Although these stories, which are well known to outsiders, are fabrications, the terminology of the ten avatāra is used to explain the corresponding times from the first moment of conception to death. These are explained in order.
The agglomeration of blood, fluid, and consciousness within the lotus of the mother’s womb is the bodhicitta vajradhara, or mind vajradhara.36 Using Viṣṇu terminology the first two months in the womb are designated the time of the fish, because the form of this agglomeration is like the red rohita fish.
In the first of these two months, the blood and fluid exists devoid of any channels.
In the second month the heart develops, and within it the ten very subtle channels of the heart are formed. These become the supports of the winds, such as the life wind and so forth. The navel is created, and within it develops the twelve very subtle channels that become the supports for the sixty-four channels of the navel cakra.
The third and fourth month of pregnancy is the time of the turtle.
The turtle has four limbs and a head in the forms of protrusions. Similarly, from the beginning of the third month, the body within the womb develops, and mere indications of limbs and face start to protrude. At the end of the third month the limbs and throat are roughly formed, hence the resemblance to a turtle.
From the beginning of the fourth month until its completion the protrusions of the hands, feet, face, throat, etc., develop steadily, and the very subtle innate and saṃbhoga channels are formed in the areas of the six major limb joints and of the face and throat.
From the fifth month until birth is the time of the wild pig.
The fifth month sees the beginnings of the 360 bones formed in dependence on the flesh, joints other than the six major joints, as well as the sense sources.
In the sixth month blood and flesh separate, and feelings of suffering and happiness are experienced. In the seventh month it is said that the being inside the womb remembers its previous existence.
Concerning this the Great Commentary says:
By the power of clairvoyance the former existence is remembered. Divorced from imprints in the mind, the sufferings of existence are held in contempt, while the path of the buddhas is praised.37
Concerning the 360 bones, the Womb States of Nanda Sutra is quoted in the commentary Illuminating Reality:
Nine bones joined at the skull, two connected bones of the cheek,
the teeth possess thirty-two,
and similarly, their roots.
The base of the ears, bones of the nape, palate bones, bones of the nose,
those of the throat, and of the chest;
in total, twenty bones.
Four bones in the eyes,
two pairs in the shoulders;
the two hands and fingers;
in total, fifty bones.
The upper back has eight bones,
the spine thirty-two,
all of which have channels,
they are therefore of four parts.
The bones of the right rib cage
are thirteen interconnected.
Those connected of the left
are also thirteen.
Within this succession of bones three sets are interconnected,
two sets have joints,
the remainder are unconnected.
The right and left thighs
in short have fifty bones.
The bones within the body in total
number 360.38 The meaning of the quote beginning “By the power of clairvoyance the former existence is remembered” is understood differently by different commentators.
Some scholars  explain such clairvoyance in the womb as a natural occurrence and quote the Adornment to the Sky Sutra quoted by Khenpo Paltsek39 in his Compendium of Sutra:
In the thirtieth week the limbs, blood, skin, and pores are all completely developed.
From then on it dwells in the mother’s womb amid blood and fetid smell.
At that time it remembers past lives and in great despair thinks, “When I emerge from my mother, I will not take birth in another mother’s womb, and I will strive toward virtue with constant effort.” However the process of birth, being squeezed by the mother’s body, the touch of the earth, the touch of hands, the pain of being washed, all dominate the mind and body, and past lives are forgotten.40
On this the omniscient Butön says:
The meaning of the quote is that during pregnancy, wind dwells within the central channel like a stick, without inhalation or exhalation, and because of this, a quasi-clairvoyance arises that remembers the past.41
Other scholars 42 say that although such experiences may arise during the time in the womb, they are like dreams and, therefore, are not certain to accumulate karma.
According to the commentary Illuminating Reality:
Those of the past have applied this to womb births in general, but these are qualities whose particular causes have preceded them.
Therefore it seems that these qualities, such as clairvoyance, must be special phenomena made manifest in the womb by the power of particular causes created in previous lives. This my omniscient master has said. Even though the being in the womb possesses that particular quality, for six months it will reside in the womb in a kind of unconsciousness and with no memory. Then at this particular time it remembers in this way. It was in order to make this point that this was spoken of.43
By the end of the seventh month, the eyebrows, hair, and the five inner sense sources, which began to develop in the fifth month, are now complete.
From the time of conception to the end of the first month no channels have developed. From the beginning of the second month, two hundred channels develop each day for the next twelve months. Therefore thirteen months from conception and twelve months from the growth of the first channel, 72,000 channels are complete.
From the actual text it is not clear which of the three types of days is being used in these calculations.44 However, if “day” is taken to be a solar day, then a month also must be taken to mean thirty solar days.
Alternatively, if a month is taken to mean a lunar month, then a day too must be read as a lunar day. This is because thirty times twelve multiplied by two hundred gives a figure of 72,000.
After the inner sense sources have developed, marrow forms inside the bones in the eighth month.
The eye and other inner sense sources expand to create the organ of the tongue with its ability to taste.
After the sense organ of the tongue has developed its ability to taste, urine and feces are formed.
Concerning the emergence from the mother’s womb, some beings emerge as soon as nine months are completed, some are born in the tenth month, some in the eleventh, while others may be born in the twelfth month. For all of them, the fifth month in the womb until birth is designated the time of the wild pig. The reason for this being that just as a pig lives on the filth of excrement and so forth, the being in the womb lives only on the foulness that is the essence of the mother’s digested food and drink.
The time of emergence from the mother’s womb is designated the time of the man-lion.
This is because at the time of birth the being inside its mother opens up the womb. This correlates with the time when Viṣṇu, in the form of a man-lion with his upper half a lion and his lower a man, killed Hiraṇyakaśipu by tearing out his stomach.
The time from birth until the growth of teeth is known as the time of the midget, because that is the form of the child.
Thirteen months after conception, the expansion of the channels is complete. The beginning of the fourteenth month marks the beginning of the expansion of the red and white elements, as well as loss of two channels each day from the 72,000 channels. In girls, the red menstrual element increases until the time of menstruation at the age of twelve.
After that the increase is halted.
In boys, the white fluid element increases until the time of semen emission at the age of sixteen. From then on the increase is halted.
After birth the teeth appear. Eight years later they fall out and are replaced. This is the period of Rāma of the Axe.
From the time the teeth are replaced up to the age of sixteen is the time of Rāmaṇa.
From sixteen until the onset of gray hair is the period of Kṛṣṇa.
From the growth of gray hair until the day of death is designated as the time of the Buddha.
This is because, just as the Buddha has a mind at peace and is of stable behavior, so the aged are of peaceful minds and, because they lack the sexual company of women, are of stable behavior.
Death itself is designated the time of the lineage bearer.
This is because the term kalkin means to make all as one caste. Similarly, at the time of death, all the elements come together as one.
That concludes the formation of the body. Phenomena supported by such a body This is under two headings: 1.A general explanation of such phenomena
2.A particular explanation of channels, winds, and drops A general explanation of such phenomena
There are many phenomena supported by the body of a being endowed with the six elements.
They include the six elements, namely, space, air, fire, water, earth, and gnosis;
the six aggregates, consisting of consciousness, mental formations, feelings, recognition, form, and gnosis;
the six organs of ear, nose, eyes, tongue, body, and mind;
the six sensory source objects, namely, sound, smell, form, taste, contact, and mental phenomena;
the six faculties, made up of the secret place, the voice, the hands, the legs, the anus, and the supreme organ;
the six activities of these faculties, namely, urinating, speaking, taking, moving, excreting, and emitting fluid;
the six winds, namely, life-sustaining, coexisting, upwardly moving, pervading, nāga, downwardly expelling;
another classification of winds, namely, joyful wind, turtle, lizard, devadatta, dhanaṃjaya, and the inborn joyful wind;
the six cakras, consisting of the crown, heart, throat, forehead, navel, and secret place.
Also included are the 21,600 winds, the 72,000 channels and, as mentioned in the Womb States of Nanda Sutra, the 360 bones and 360 joints.
None of the above phenomena are beyond the nature of the six elements.
The six aggregates from consciousness to gnosis are respectively phenomena of space, air, fire, earth, water, and gnosis.
Moreover the six aggregates and the six elements are classified as method and wisdom, with the six aggregates as method and the six elements as wisdom.
If they are individually matched up, the aggregate of gnosis is method and the element of space is wisdom.
The aggregate of form is method and the element of air is wisdom.
The aggregate of discernment is method and the element of fire is wisdom.
The aggregate of feelings is method and the element of water is wisdom.
The aggregate of mental formations is method and the element of earth is wisdom.
The aggregate of consciousness is method and the element of gnosis is wisdom.
Similarly the organs of the ears, nose, eyes, tongue, body, and mind are, respectively, phenomena of the elements of space, air, fire, water, earth, and gnosis.
The sound, smell, form, taste, contact, and phenomena sensory source objects are respectively phenomena of gnosis, earth, water, fire, air, and space elements.
Moreover the six organs and the six source objects correlate with each other as subject and object, and in this context the six objects are wisdom and the six subjects, in dependence on their individual objects, are method.
Similarly the six faculties, namely, the secret place , the voice, hands, legs, anus, and the śaṅkhinī46 supreme organ are respectively phenomena of the elements of space, air, fire, water, earth, and gnosis.
Urinating, speaking, taking, moving, excreting, and holding and emitting fluid are respectively phenomena of the elements of gnosis, earth, water, fire, air, and space.
Furthermore the faculties are method and the activities they control are wisdom.
In this way each can be paired up with its respective counterpart.
The life-sustaining, coexisting, upwardly moving, pervading, nāga, and downwardly expelling winds are phenomena of the space, air, fire, water, earth, and gnosis elements.
Similarly, joyful, turtle, lizard, devadatta, dhaṃnajaya, and the innate joyful wind are phenomena of the space, air, fire, water, earth, and gnosis elements, respectively.
The crown, heart, throat, forehead, navel, and secret-parts cakras are phenomena of the space, air, fire, water, earth, and gnosis elements respectively.
Fingers and toes from the little finger or toe to the thumb or big toe are phenomena of the space, air, fire, water, and earth elements respectively.
The teeth are a part of the bone structure, and when the first two upper teeth appear in a child, the right tooth is an earth-element phenomenon and the left a water-element phenomenon.
When the two lower teeth appear, the right is a fire-element phenomenon and the left tooth an air-element phenomenon.
Therefore the earth element of the upper tooth and the air element of the lower are method and wisdom, and the water element of the upper and fire element of the lower are method and wisdom.
When the next two upper teeth appear, the right is of the element of fire and the left of the element of air.
When the next two lower teeth appear, the right is of the earth element and the left of water.
The fire and water elements of the upper and lower match up as method and wisdom, as do the earth and air elements.
The next right and left teeth, as above, are of fire and air in the lower and of water and earth in the upper, and so on.
In this way the upper and lower teeth grow and increase in number.
The thirty-two teeth should be understood as being phenomena of these four elements with pairings of earth and air as method and wisdom and fire and water as method and wisdom.
Space and gnosis as method and wisdom cover all phenomena.
The colors of the phenomena of the six elements are as follows.
Those of the element of space are green, those of the element of air are black, those of the element of fire are red, those of the water element are white, those of the earth element are yellow, and those of gnosis are blue.
This last element covers all phenomena.
If the elements are applied to the six families, then phenomena of the element of space are of the vajra family, those of the element of air are of the karma family, those of the element of fire are of the jewel family, those of the water element are of the lotus family, those of the earth element are of the wheel family, and those of the element of gnosis are of the curved knife family.
Channels, Winds, and Drops This is under two headings:
1.Explanation in accord with this tantra and commentary 2.An examination of the queries arising from the inconsistencies between this explanation of channels, winds, and drops and that of other tantras Explanation in accord with this tantra and commentary This has two outlines:
1.A description of the channels, winds, and drops
2.How the winds move within the channels
A description of the channels, winds, and drops This has three outlines: 1.channels Channels The primary channels are the right, left, and central channel.
These are located midway between the left and right halves of the body. They are closer to the back of the body and near the spine.
The central channel runs in between the left and right channels. The upper tips of all three are located between the eyebrows.
The lower tips are found at the bhaga or male organ and at the tip of the anus.
At the cakras the left and right channels entwine themselves around the central channel to form a channel knot.
Above the navel the three channels are known by various names.
Sun channel, piṅgalā, rasanā, path of the sun, and so forth are terms used to denote the right channel.
Moon channel, igasa,47 lalanā, path of the moon, and so forth are names given to the left channel.
The Rāhu channel, supreme channel, and so forth are names of the central channel.
The left and right channels below the navel are known as the excrement and urine channels.
Similarly the central channel below the navel is known as śaṅkhinī, the Kālāgni channel, the channel of descending fluid, and the supreme channel.
The śaṅkhinī and the central channel are also referred to as dhūtī. At points on the avadhūtī48 are cakras entwined by the left and right channels. Of these there are six: the cakra of the secret place with its thirty-two channel petals, the cakra of the navel with sixty-four channel petals, the cakra of the heart with its eight channel petals, the cakra of the throat with thirty-two channel petals, the cakra of the forehead with sixteen channel petals, and the cakra of the crown with its four channel petals.
Concerning the makeup of the thirty-two channel petals of the secret- place cakra, six petals branch off from the hub of the cakra.
These are the six inner channel petals.
Four of these split into two to make eight, and together with the remaining undivided petals make up the ten intermediate channel petals. Of these ten, six split into two to make twelve petals, and with the remaining four make up the sixteen outer petals. The formation of the thirty-two channel petals of the secret-place cakra then is in three layers.
The inner layer has six petals, the intermediate has ten, and the outer sixteen.
The Great Commentary, on the forty-sixth verse of the Inner chapter, clearly describes the thirty-two petals: The secret place has thirty-two petals. On the sixteen outer petals are the vowel channels.
On the ten inner petals are the channels of the aggregates and the channels of the elements.
On the innermost petals are the six empty49 channels.50 The formation of the sixty-four petals of the navel cakra is as follows. Four channel petals branch out from the center of the cakra.
Each of these petals branches off into two to make eight petals.
These eight again split up to make sixteen petals. Except for the four petals located at the four intermediate points among these sixteen, each of the other twelve divide into five to make sixty petals, making a total of sixty-four.
However on the forty-first verse of the Inner chapter of the Great Commentary it says:
The heart of the navel wheel possesses four petals.
Outside of that there are eight.
Beyond that are twelve.51 Doesn’t this say that eight petals branch off into twelve?
How, then, could it divide into sixteen?
Of the sixteen petals that branch off from the eight, four are empty channels and twelve are the wind-movement channels.52 Therefore the quote “Beyond that are twelve” refers to these twelve wind- movement channels.
If this were not the case and the eight channels divided only into twelve, then the four empty channels would not exist and the sixty-four channel petals would be incomplete.
Twelve and a half fingerwidths above the center of the navel cakra is the center of the heart cakra.
It has eight channel petals, each of which is named.
The eastern petal is named rohinī, the southeastern petal is hastijihvā, the southern is piṅgalā, the southwestern petal is puṣya, the western is jaya, the northwestern is alambuṣa, the northern is meṣa, and the northeastern is kuha.
Twelve and a half fingerwidths above the center of the heart cakra lies the center of the throat cakra. This cakra has thirty-two channel petals.
Eight petals branch out from its center, each of which splits into two to make sixteen channel petals.
Each of these sixteen in turn divides into two to make thirty-two.
Four of those are empty channels, in which coarse wind does not flow.
Twelve and a half fingerwidths above the center of the throat cakra at the forehead is a cakra of sixteen petals.
From its center eight petals branch out, each of which divides into two to make sixteen. Two of them are empty channels, in which coarse wind does not flow.
The cakra of the crown has four channel petals. In total, then, there are 156 channel petals within the six cakras. The descriptions here of six cakras are for the purpose of assigning channel petals to deities and so forth, but the cakras are not limited to six.
In A Short Teaching on Initiations it says: To the lotuses of navel, secret, and jewel,
body, speech, and mind descend.53 This quote indicates that at the center of the jewel also there is a cakra.
The Great Commentary, on the forty-fifth verse of the Inner chapter, says:
“By there being numerous joints, these glorious cakras take many forms.” This means that because there are 360 joints in this body, there are 360 cakras, and a similar number of wind activities, such as those of the life-sustaining wind, and so forth.54
This states that at each of the locations of the 360 joints there is a cakra, and wherever there is a cakra there are the activities of the winds.
In the Great Commentary it says: Twelve and a half fingerwidths above the navel wheel in the region of the heart is a cakra of eight spokes.
And, further on: Twelve and a half fingerwidths above the lotus of the heart is the throat cakra. Twelve and a half fingerwidths above the lotus of the throat lies the lotus of the forehead with sixteen petals.55 Concerning the above quotes, scholars such as the omniscient Butön say:
The measurement of twelve and a half fingerwidths from the navel to the heart, from the heart to the center of the throat cakra, and from there to the center of the forehead cakra does not refer to the fingerwidths of an ordinary human but to the twelve and half fingerwidths that make up half the length of a buddha’s forearm.
However the commentary Illuminating Reality is correct when commenting on this assertion: These words of commentary are from the section that speaks of the cakras acting as supports for the regular movement of wind at the heart of an ordinary being during ordinary existence.
Therefore I do not see the relevance of that particular way of dispelling the contradiction.56 The commentary goes on to explain:
There are not twelve and a half of a particular being’s fingerwidths between his or her actual navel and heart.
However either the navel cakra is a little lower than the actual navel, or alternatively the heart cakra also is not to be found at the bottommost point of a heart of a size proportionate to the dimensions of beings such as gods and so forth, but is found halfway along the heart’s vertical axis. I think the contradiction has to be resolved in this way, and that this is what the commentary is saying. It seems that both the above passages have tried to resolve the contradiction on the basis of there not being twelve and a half fingerwidths of an ordinary being between the central point of the navel and the heart at a point midway between the two nipples. However the distance from the central point of the navel to throat is twenty-four fingerwidths.
The height of the throat is six fingerwidths, as in the line “the throat of Meru is six fingerwidths on the body.” There are twelve fingerwidths between the upper edge of the throat and the upper edge of the forehead, as stated by the line “from the throat to the edge of the forehead is twelve fingerwidths on the body.” Of these, there are four fingerwidths from the upper edge of the throat to the nose, and from the tip of the nose to the point between the eyebrows there are also four fingerwidths.
In total, therefore, the distance between the navel and the point between the eyebrows is thirty-eight fingerwidths.
The Great Commentary states that from the navel to the heart, from the heart to the throat, and from the throat to the forehead are each twelve and a half fingerwidths, which gives a total of thirty-seven and a half fingerwidths.
Therefore, although the distance between each of these points is given as twelve and a half fingerwidths, the distance from the navel to the lower edge of the forehead is thirty-eight fingerwidths. Therefore the previous measurement falls short of the forehead by half a fingerwidth.
In this way, when the distance between the actual navel and the point between the eyebrows is divided into three sections of equal length, there is no mistake in each part not coming out at twelve and a half fingerwidths.
Therefore, although each part is given as twelve and a half fingerwidths, the half a fingerwidth distance of the forehead is to be divided into three, giving a distance of one barley seed and one thirtieth of a barley seed, and this measurement has to be added to each distance of twelve and a half fingerwidths from the navel to the heart, and so forth.
This section of the Great Commentary explaining the location of the cakras is taught for the purpose of knowing where the centers of the cakras to be penetrated are located and, therefore, is to be taken literally.
The measurements of twelve and a half fingerwidths given for the distances between the navel and the heart, etc., are to be understood as being on the basis of equal allotment and as an approximate calculation.
There are ten winds. The life-sustaining wind is of the element of space.
The coexisting wind is of the element of wind.
The upwardly moving wind is of the element of fire. The pervading wind is of the element of water.
The nāga wind is of the element of earth.
The turtle wind is of the element of air.
The lizard wind is of the element of fire.
The devadatta wind is of the element of water.
The dhanaṃjaya wind is of the element of earth.
The downwardly expelling wind is of the element of gnosis.
The life-sustaining wind in terms of its pathways can be divided into three — the wind that moves through the left channel, the wind that moves through the right channel, and the wind that moves through the central channel.
In terms of its function, the downwardly expelling wind can be divided into three — two that push excrement and urine through the two lower orifices and one that carries fluid through the śaṅkhinī, or supreme channel.
Concerning the locations of the winds, eight winds beginning with the coexisting wind are to be found in the eight petals of the heart cakra.
The coexisting wind is located in the eastern rohinī channel petal.
The upwardly moving wind is in the southeastern hastijihvā channel petal. The pervading wind is located in the southern piṅgalā petal.
The nāga wind is found in the southwestern puṣya petal. The turtle wind is found within the western jaya petal. The lizard wind is within the northwestern alambuṣa petal. The devadatta wind is within the northern meṣa channel petal. The dhanaṃjaya wind is within the northeastern kuha petal.
These channels are the primary birthplaces of these winds, although these winds also pervade and inhabit all the 72,000 channels. With this in mind the Great Commentary says on the forty-second verse of the Inner chapter:
The life-sustaining wind and others pervade the 72,000 channels. However the eight winds are created within the eight places.57
The guardians of the winds are as follows. The life-sustaining wind is the wind of Akṣobhya. The downwardly expelling is the wind of Vajrasattva.
The coexisting is the wind of Amoghasiddhi.
The upwardly moving is the wind of Ratnasaṃbhava.
The pervading is the wind of Amitābha. The nāga is the wind of Vairocana. The turtle wind is the wind of Amoghasiddhi. The lizard wind is the wind of Ratnasambhava. The devadatta is the wind of Amitābha.
The dhanaṃjaya is the wind of Vairocana. As previously explained, the end of the thirteenth month after conception marks the first growth in the red and white drops. These drops continue to grow in the case of a boy until the age of sixteen and in a girl until the age of twelve.
When a girl reaches the age of twelve, menstrual blood emerges from the secret place, and the growth of menstrual blood, or the red drop, is complete.
When a boy reaches the age of sixteen, fluid emerges from the organ, and the growth in the drop, or fluid, is complete.
In general, red and white drops are to be found in every part of the body, like sesame oil in a sesame seed.
The white is primarily situated in the cakra of great bliss in the crown of the head, while the red is primarily to be found in the cakras of the secret place and the navel.
In its form of fluid, or white bodhicitta, the white drop dwells in and emerges from the left channel. In its form of menstrual blood, or red bodhicitta, the red drop dwells in and emerges from the right channel. The śaṅkhinī, or supreme channel, one of the three channels below the navel, carries both red and white drops. At the center of the forehead cakra is found the drop that creates the waking state.
In the center of the throat cakra is the drop that creates dream states.
In the center of the heart cakra is the drop that creates the state of deep sleep.
In the center of the navel cakra is the drop that creates the fourth state.58 Similarly locations of drops that create the four states are also found from the navel downward. The one drop at the navel has the potential to create the fourth state as well as the waking state, and so it is said that both states share a common basis on that one drop.
Therefore at the navel is found the drop that creates the waking state.
At the secret place is the drop that creates dream states. In the center of the jewel lies the drop that creates deep sleep.
At the tip of the jewel lies the drop that creates the fourth state. In the drops at the forehead and at the navel, which create the waking state, resides the potential to create the endless conceptions of the waking state in ordinary beings as well as the potential to create limitless emanated bodies at the time of becoming a buddha.
Similarly, in the drops contained at the throat and secret place can be found the potential to create dreams in ordinary beings and saṃbhogakāya speech59 in all its aspects in the enlightened state.
In the drops at the heart and in the center of the jewel that create the state of deep sleep is found the potential to create the unconsciousness of sleep in ordinary beings as well as the nonconceptual dharmakāya freed of all fabrication at the time of enlightenment.
In the drops at the navel and at the tip of the jewel responsible for creating the fourth state can be found the potential to create contaminated pleasure in ordinary beings as well as the body of bliss that is the supreme and unchanging bliss of a buddha.
Therefore, on the paths of the generation and completion stage six-branched yoga, the potential of these eight drops to create the faults that arise in ordinary beings is purified, and the potential to create the qualities of the four bodies is developed in terms of ever-increasing quality until the ultimate result is actualized. To summarize: the red and white drops explained above are indispensable causes for the creation of a womb-born body. From beginningless time the imprints of the emission of the red and white elements have been planted again and again, and it is by these imprints of emission alone that the wandering in samsara continues.
By meditative familiarization with the vajra yoga of penetrative focusing on the channels and winds of the vajra body, the red and white elements do not fall, and their movement is restrained. This alone will bring about the actualization of the indivisible union of the form body of empty form and the dharmakāya of supreme and unchanging bliss60 inseparable from emptiness. This is how the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries explain the tantra. Therefore those who wish for the supreme siddhi by following this particular path of practice should value the bodhicitta elements.
In the first summary from the Realms chapter of the Great Commentary it says:
Those whose white fluid falls during their companionship with wisdom,61 by what will their bliss increase?62
Occasionally, at the appropriate time of year,
the deer-eating lion seeks the bliss of mating,
while the gravel-eating pigeon does so constantly.
Because their fluid falls once or many times,
neither finds supreme bliss.
Similarly the ascetic and the lustful
lose their fluid in dreams and while awake.
Bitten by a snake while asleep, one will not live;
Similarly the ascetic weakened by not keeping his fluid
is ruined by a woman’s womb.63
How the winds move within the channels This is dealt with under two headings
1.The flow of wind through the petals of the four cakras
2.Movement of wind through the nostrils The flow of wind through the petals of the four cakras The Great Commentary says on the sixty-second verse of the Inner chapter:
For those born from a womb, the month of conception is Capricorn.
From there the seventh, the month of Cancer, is the month of the creation of the life-sustaining wind.64 If this quote meant that every womb birth was conceived only in the actual month of Capricorn,65 the consequences would be absurd.
It means that whatever the month of conception, it is to be known as the month of Capricorn, and that the seventh month on from conception is known as the month of Cancer. In this way the passage means that seven months on from the month of conception, labeled Capricorn, in the month labeled Cancer, the first life-sustaining wind is formed.
From that time onward, and for as long as the being remains in the womb, the wind stays within the central channel as rigid as a stick, without moving through exhalation and inhalation. However, immediately after birth, fifty-six and a quarter winds flow from the central channel.
From then on wind moves through either the left or right zodiac channels.
It is incorrect to understand the above line “For those born from a womb, the month of conception is Capricorn” as referring to the time of the flow of wind within the mother’s Capricorn channel, and that conception for womb-born beings will always occur at that time.
If that were the case, it would have to mean that the time when wind flows through the mother’s Cancer channel, which is the seventh channel on from the channel of Capricorn, would be the time of the formation of the life-sustaining wind of the being in the womb.
It would then follow that this wind would be created on the very day that the being entered the womb, and this cannot be so, because on the day of entering the womb not even the beginnings of the channels that carry the winds are present.
Therefore “month of Capricorn” and “month of Cancer” must refer to external months.
Some have said that as well as referring to an external month, the quote beginning “For those born from womb, the month of conception is Capricorn” is made on the basis of those womb-born human beings conceived in the actual month of Capricorn and does not refer to every womb-born human.
However the Great Commentary says on the thirty-eighth verse of the Inner chapter:
“Lord of men, from the lagna66 of Cancer” refers to the fact that in the external world, the birthplace of the sun was the house of Cancer.
Similarly, in whatever lagna every birth takes place, that house is known by the name of Cancer and is the birthplace of the life-sustaining wind.67
“Every birth” includes every womb-born human, and so the previous explanation is correct. Having established this, as soon as a being emerges from the womb, fifty-six and a quarter breaths of wind move through the central channel and flow equally through both nostrils. Each unit of breath is one exhalation and one inhalation. Immediately afterward, the space mandala wind flows through the Aries channel, or Aries lagna channel, on the left. This process continues until finally the earth mandala wind flows through the Pisces lagna channel on the right, at which time 21,600 winds will have flowed and one day will have passed.
The house, or lagna, channels are explained as follows. The intermediate circle of the navel cakra has twelve channel petals.
Those at the front of the body are in the east.
Those on the left are in the north, those on the right in the south, and those at the back in the west.
In the same way that other phenomena of the four directions are enumerated by beginning with the east, here too they are counted from east at the front of the body.
Therefore the first channel petal at the front left of the body is the house of Aries.
Moving counterclockwise around the body, the second is Gemini, third Leo, fourth Libra, fifth Sagittarius, and the house of Aquarius is the sixth channel petal of the left.
Likewise the first channel petal at the front of the body on its right is the house of Taurus.
The second is Cancer, the third Virgo, the fourth Scorpio, the fifth Capricorn, and the sixth channel petal at the back on the right is the house of Pisces.
Having established these channels, the movement of wind through them can be explained.
Immediately after birth, fifty-six and a quarter winds68 flow from the central channel. After that, 1,800 breaths of the space-mandala wind, less fifty-six and a quarter, each breath consisting of one unit of inhalation and exhalation, flow through the Aries channel petal, the first petal of the left.
Then fifty-six and a quarter of gnosis-mandala winds flow from the central channel at the point of the changeover of wind movement from the Aries channel petal, the first petal of the left, to the Taurus channel petal, the first petal of the right.
After that, 1,800 breaths minus fifty-six and a quarter flow from the house of the Taurus petal, the first petal of the right.
Similarly, at the times of the other house channel petals’ changeover of wind movement, fifty-six and a quarter gnosis winds will flow from the central channel.
After earth wind has flowed from the Taurus petal, the first channel petal of the right, the air-mandala wind flows from the second petal of the left. After that the water-mandala wind flows from the second petal of the right, followed by the fire-mandala wind from the third on the left.
The fire wind also flows from the third on the right, the water-mandala wind from the fourth on the left, the air-mandala wind from the fourth on the right, the earth-mandala wind from the fifth on the left, the space-mandala wind from the fifth on the right, the space wind also from the sixth on the left, and, finally, 1,800 breaths less fifty-six and a quarter of the earth-mandala wind flow from the house of Pisces, the sixth petal on the right.
In this way, in each of the channel petals of the twelve houses where these twelve major wind movements69 occur, 1,800 winds of the five mandalas of space and so forth, less fifty-six and a quarter winds, to make 1,743 3/4 breaths, flow within each period. Also, at the changeover point of each of the twelve wind movements, fifty-six and a quarter winds flow from the central channel, making a total of 675 winds flowing from the central channel each day. 1,743 3/4 breaths in each of the twelve major movements totals 20,925.
To this is added the 675 winds, making a total of 21,600 breaths.
This is the way the wind moves in one solar day of twelve wind movements at the navel cakra.
At the beginning of the second solar day, air-mandala wind flows in the first channel petal on the left, which is the Aries wind-movement channel.
Then in the first petal on the right, water-mandala wind flows in the Taurus channel.
Similarly, from the second on the left to the sixth on the left, fire-mandala wind, water-mandala wind, earth-mandala wind, space-mandala wind, and air-mandala wind flow, respectively.
Similarly, from the second on the right to the sixth on the right, fire-mandala wind, air-mandala wind, space-mandala wind, earth-mandala wind, and water-mandala wind flow, respectively.
This is how the wind moves on the second day.
At the beginning of the third day, fire-mandala wind flows in the first channel petal on the left.
Similarly, from the second petal to the sixth, water-mandala wind, earth-mandala wind, space-mandala wind, air-mandala wind, and fire-mandala wind flow, respectively.
After fire-mandala wind flows in the first petal of the left, fire-mandala wind flows in the first channel petal of the right, air-mandala wind in the second, space-mandala wind in the third, earth-mandala wind in the fourth, water-mandala wind in the fifth, and fire-mandala wind in the sixth petal.
This is how the winds move on the third day. At the beginning of the fourth day, water-mandala wind flows in the first channel petal on the left.
After that air-mandala wind flows in the first petal on the right.
In the same way earth-mandala wind flows in the second petal on the left, space-mandala wind in the third, air-mandala wind in the fourth, fire-mandala wind in the fifth, and water-mandala wind in the sixth.
Similarly, on the right, space-mandala wind flows through the second, earth-mandala air through the third, water-mandala wind through the fourth, fire-mandala wind through the fifth, and air-mandala wind through the sixth.
This is how the winds flow on the fourth day.
At the beginning of the fifth day, earth-mandala wind flows through the first channel petal on the left.
After that space-mandala wind moves through the first petal on the right.
Similarly space-mandala wind moves through the second petal on the left, air-mandala wind through the third, fire-mandala wind through the fourth, water-mandala wind through the fifth, and earth-mandala wind through the sixth.
Likewise earth-mandala wind moves through the second petal on the right, water-mandala wind through the third, fire-mandala wind through the fourth, air-mandala wind through the fifth, and space-mandala wind through the sixth on the right.
This is the movement of the winds on the fifth day.
At the beginning of the sixth day, space-wind moves through the first channel petal on the left, and earth wind moves through the first channel petal of the right, as on the first day.
The process is repeated every five days, with the winds flowing and circulating as before. The process has to be this way. The Great Commentary says on the sixty-fifth verse of the Inner chapter:
In the six uneven petals of Aries and so forth, the emptiness70 mandala flows, expelled by wind.
In the right there are six days of flow, and with six days of changeover, the earth mandala flows in the even houses of Taurus and so forth expelled by the life wind.71
This says that the winds of the five mandalas of space and so forth flow within each of the twelve channel petals, and the way that each of the five mandalas flows through the petals has to be as explained above.
Furthermore, when the space-mandala wind has flowed through the first channel petal on the left, it will again flow through the sixth channel petal on the left.
After that, when winds flow again through the left channels, they begin from the first petal on the left, and that wind will be the air-mandala wind, which comes after the space-mandala wind. In this way, the left and right major changeovers in the flow of the winds must occur, as previously explained, alternately left and right. When wind flows through each of the house channels, the channel tubes are divided into five sections — four in the four directions and one in the center.
The minor-element space mandala flows through the center, the air mandala through the east, the fire mandala through the south, the water mandala through the north, and the earth mandala through the west.
For each of these there are 360 breaths less eleven and a quarter.72
There are twenty-five mandalas of the minor elements.
They are the space mandala of space, the air mandala of space, the fire mandala of space, the water mandala of space, and the earth mandala of space;
the space, air, fire, water, and earth mandalas of air;
the five mandalas from the space mandala of fire to the earth mandala of fire; the five from the space mandala of water to the earth mandala of water; and the five from the space mandala of earth to the earth mandala of earth. This makes twenty-five.
The flow of the five mandalas of the minor elements is as follows. Whatever wind of the major elements is flowing in the one of the major wind movements of the twelve channel petals, the five minor elements also flow in that wind. Such a flow, moreover, is strictly ordered.
To illustrate this, when the mandala of the major element of space flows through the first channel petal of the left, the minor mandalas from the space mandala of space to the earth mandala of space also flow.
When the mandala of the major element of earth flows through the first channel petal on the right, the mandalas from the earth mandala of earth to the space mandala of earth also flow.
The order in which they flow is as follows. When flowing through the left channel petals, the minor elements also flow in the order of space, air, fire, water, and earth.
Similarly, when wind flows through the right channel petals, they flow in the order earth, water, fire, air, and space. In this way, when the major wind movements change from the left to the right, the minor elements move from earth to earth,73 and when moving from right to left, from space to space. This movement is fixed.
Each of the twelve channel petals of the major wind movements splits up into five petals of these five minor wind movements. The channel tubes of the major wind movements are divided east, west, south, north, and center, and the space, air, fire, water, and earth minor elements flow along these five directions. The five channel petals of the minor elements are also arranged east, west, south, north, and center, and the flow of winds within them mirrors the directional flow of the major wind elements. In each petal of minor wind movement, the flow is 360 breaths minus eleven and a quarter, or 348 3/4. This is how winds flow within the petals of the navel.
The flow in the channel petals of the heart is mentioned in the Great Commentary on the forty-first verse of the Inner chapter:
It should be known that within the eight petals of the lotus of the heart are channels of periodic wind movement. The five mandalas flow to the nostrils from these channels.
The winds flow because of the channels, and the inhalations and exhalations of each channel number 2,700, or seven and a half hours.74 This quote says that in each of the eight petals of the heart, 21,600 divided by eight, or 2,700, breaths flow. This in hours comes to seven and a half.75 This quote is made on the basis of not excluding the 675 breaths that flow in one day through the central channel. The actual measurement is explained as follows.
At the changeover times of the twelve major wind movements of the navel channel, fifty-six and a quarter breaths flow from the central channel. These breaths flow in the central channel from the navel cakra to the upper opening of the central channel. Therefore they do not flow into the channel petals of the heart, the throat, and the forehead. 21,600 breaths less 675 leaves 20,925 breaths. This divided by eight comes to 2,615 5/8, and this is the actual number of breaths that flow within each petal of the heart cakra each day.
This is not the amount of wind that flows during each period of flow.
On the basis of the flow within each period, whatever quantity of wind flows during the period of each major wind movement at the navel, that much has to flow at each period within the petals of the heart, throat, and forehead.
This is because, in one major wind movement on the left at the navel, 1,800 breaths minus fifty-six and a quarter will flow. That amount of wind will also flow through the left nostril. Moving to the right, 1,800 breaths minus fifty-six and a quarter will flow from one channel petal on the right. At the same time, the flow moves from the left nostril to the right, and a similar number of breaths will flow. Likewise, during each period of flow, the number of breaths at the left and right channel petals of the heart, throat, and forehead must be the same as the flow at the nostrils and at each of the wind movements at the navel-channel petals.
This process can be explained using the first flow of wind through the first navel-channel petal on the left while wind flows simultaneously through the first heart-channel petal on the left.
Firstly, one set of 1,800 breaths flows through the first heart-channel petal on the left.
Then one set of 1,800 breaths flow through the first channel petal on the right.
After that 900 breaths flow again through the first petal on the left.
Then 900 breaths flow through the second petal on the left.
After that 900 breaths flow through the first petal on the right, and then 900 breaths flow through the second petal on the right.
Then 1,800 breaths flow through the second petal on the left, and after that 1,800 breaths flow through the second petal on the right.
This process continues in similar fashion through the other petals.
This has been calculated without separating out the flow of wind from the central channel, and so the number of breaths flowing through each petal of the heart should be known in this way as being 2,700. The throat cakra has thirty-two petals, of which four are empty channels through which no wind flows. The way in which wind flows through the other twenty-eight is spoken of in the Great Commentary:
In the twenty-eight petals flows the wind day and night.
Through a division of sixty hours, the wind flows in each petal.76 This means that sixty hours or 21,600 breaths is divided among the twenty-eight wind-carrying petals. This comes to 770 3/7 breaths. This is the number of breaths or winds that flow within each petal of the throat cakra each day. Similarly, the Great Commentary says:
Of the sixteen petals of the forehead lotus two are ignored, and in the remaining fourteen flows the wind day and night. For a fourteenth of sixty hours, it flows through each channel.77 This means that for sixty hours, or 21,600 breaths, apart from the two empty petals, wind flows through the sixteen-petal forehead cakra. This number of breaths divided by fourteen gives a figure of 1,542 6/7 breaths, and this is the number of breaths that flow through each channel petal of the forehead each day. These are all calculated on the basis of not separating out the flow of wind from the central channel.
If they were, then the 675 breaths that flow through the central channel each day are to be subtracted from the 21,600 breaths to leave 20,925, and how this is to be divided up can be known from the above.
Movement of wind through the nostrils Upon birth from the mother’s womb, fifty-six and a quarter winds flow from the central channel through both nostrils equally. Then the same number of winds that are flowing in the major wind movement at the navel on the left will flow only through the left nostril. At the changeover period from left to right, the number of breaths flowing through the central channel will be the number of breaths that flow through both nostrils equally.
Similarly the number of winds that flow in each major wind movement of the channel petals on the right is the number of breaths that move solely through the right nostril.
The wind of each major wind movement is divided into the wind of the five minor elements. The space-element wind flows through the center of the nostrils. The air-element wind flows through the upper part of the nostril.
The fire-element wind flows through the sides of the nostrils that border the cheeks. The water-element wind flows through the center of the nostrils close to the bone. The earth-element wind flows through the nostrils close to the base and toward the upper lip. How far the breath travels outside the nostrils and inside is explained as follows.
The earth-mandala wind travels twelve fingerwidths outside the nostrils.
The water-mandala wind travels thirteen fingerwidths outside the nostril.
The fire-mandala wind travels fourteen fingerwidths, the air-mandala wind travels fifteen, and the space-mandala wind travels sixteen fingerwidths.
Each breath then returns, and the farther it travels outside, the shorter it travels inside, and the shorter it travels outside, the farther it travels inside. Therefore the space-mandala wind reaches the center of the navel.
The air-mandala wind reaches one fingerwidth below the navel. The fire-mandala wind reaches two fingerwidths below the navel, the water-mandala wind three fingerwidths below, and the earth-mandala wind four fingerwidths below.
The wind in its five parts must travel at least as far as the navel, because at the times of a wind-movement changeover, wind enters the central channel, and it has to enter from the center of the navel cakra.
Moreover the gnosis wind that enters the central channel after the flow of the five winds will travel the same distance inward or outward as the particular wind that precedes the gnosis wind.
The Great Commentary says: The gnosis-mandala wind enters in the middle after the earth-mandala wind and travels twelve fingerwidths from both nostrils.
The wind entering the central channel after the space-mandala wind travels sixteen fingerwidths.78 Discrepancies between Kālacakra and Other Tantras An examination of the queries arising from the discrepancies between this presentation of channels, winds, and drops and that of other tantras This is dealt with under two headings: 1.A brief explanation of the discrepancies between this presentation and presentations of channel, winds, and drops in other tantras
2.An explanation of the thinking behind presentations as given here and in other tantras A brief explanation of the discrepancies between this presentation and presentations of channel, winds, and drops in other tantras In the Hevajra Tantra it says:
At the emanation wheel is a lotus of sixty-four petals, at the dharma wheel eight petals, at the enjoyment wheel sixteen petals, and at the wheel of great bliss thirty-two petals.79
This is to be taken literally and means that the throat cakra has sixteen petals and that the crown cakra, also explained as the wheel of great bliss, has thirty-two petals.
In keeping with the Great Commentary, the Vajragarbha Bodhisattva Commentary says that the throat cakra has thirty-two petals and that the forehead cakra has sixteen.
Concerning this reversal in the Kālacakra, the oral tradition of the lamas says that these two should be known as being of thirty-two and sixteen petals as explained, but that in Kālacakra the order is reversed.
Therefore the line “and at the wheel of great bliss thirty-two petals” also refers to the forehead cakra.
In this way, for the intended disciples of hidden tantra, the wheel of great bliss is explained as being the cakra of the crown or uṣṇīṣa, with its thirty-two petals, and the cakra of the forehead, the cakra between the eyebrows, is known as the sixteen-petal wheel of wind.
This is just a brief explanation of the inconsistencies in the presentation of the channels. The inconsistencies in the presentations of the winds are as follows. The presentations of the ten winds are similar.
However, concerning the locations and the guardians of the five root winds, the Vajra Garland Explanatory Tantra says:
The life-sustaining wind abides in the heart,
born from the family of Akṣobhya.
The downwardly expelling, dwelling in the secret area,
is born from Ratnasambhava.
The upwardly moving dwells in the throat,
in the nature of Amitābha.
The coexisting is in the lotus of the navel,
in the nature of Amoghasiddhi.
The pervading dwells in every limb, in the nature of Vairocana.80
Therefore the life-sustaining wind abides in the heart and is the wind of Akṣobhya.
The downwardly expelling wind is found in the secret place and is the wind of Ratnasambhava.
The upwardly moving wind dwells in the cakra of the throat and is the wind of Amitābha.
The coexisting wind dwells within the navel cakra and is the wind of Amoghasiddhi.
The pervading wind is found in all joints, such as those of the limbs, and is the wind of Vairocana.
Furthermore the life-sustaining wind dwelling at the heart is also explained as being of two kinds — coarse and subtle. The coarse wind brings about inhalation and exhalation at the nostrils, and although this coarse wind is in the heart cakra, it does not enter the dhūtī of the heart channel knot. The subtle life-sustaining wind is inseparable from the very subtle mind of clear light and is known as its indestructible mount. It dwells within the dhūtī of the channel knot at the very center of the heart cakra.
The Vajra Garland Explanatory Tantra says:
In the space within the lotus of the heart the wisdom vajra always sits.81
This is the worldly realm of powerful Akṣobhya,
there his constant residence,
under the name “wind of gnosis.”82 Also the Requests of the Four Goddesses Explanatory Tantra says:
Of tiny size, the supreme and subtle, the phenomenon of mind in the form of a drop,
dwelling constantly at the heart’s center,
ablaze with great rays of light.83 Thus the indestructible and very subtle wind is also described as five blazing rays of light. The Vajra Mandala Ornament Tantra says:
In the center of the heart, the indestructible, clear and like a lamp,
unchanging and extremely subtle,
the syllable “a” supreme.84 This, too, teaches the very subtle indestructible wind.
Illuminating Reality talks of “emptiness perceived when the innate wind returns to its place after the other winds have dissolved.” This innate wind is the very subtle life-sustaining wind.
This very subtle wind and its very subtle mind of clear light form the foundation of all phenomena of samsara and are the special meditative foundations of the two forms of a buddha, with this wind being the special meditative foundation of the enjoyment body of a buddha. The above is the thinking behind hidden tantras as explained by their intended disciples.
The Great Commentary says that the mind of clear light is the foundation of all phenomena of samsara and nirvana but does not even mention the very subtle wind. Furthermore the main seat of the winds is said to be the heart-channel petals, which is at variance with the locations of the four winds, from coexisting wind to pervading wind, as taught in the other tantras.
Although the guardians of the winds coincide as far as the life- sustaining and coexisting winds are concerned, the Great Commentary mentions the upwardly moving as belonging to Ratnasambhava, the down wardly expelling as belonging to Vajrasattva, and the pervading as belonging to Amitābha and not to Vairocana.
Therefore there is some discrepancy concerning the guardians of these three winds.
Moreover, concerning which nostril the winds pass through at the times of their coming and going, of which element mandala they are, and of their colors, the Vajra Garland Explanatory Tantra says:
The five buddha families
arise from the nostrils,
flowing upon the five winds,
constantly active within the body.
Flowing into the nose,
emerging from the five openings,
left, right, both, and gently, these are the four ways.
From the right, the fire-mandala element,
of the color red,
the wind of the lotus protector.
From the left, the air-mandala element,
appearing as green and yellow,
the wind of the activity protector.
From both, the mighty mandala, the element of earth,
the color of gold,
the wind of the jewel protector.
The element of the gently flowing,
the color of pure crystal,
the water mandala,
wind of the vajra protector.
That arising from all elements, supporter and supported,
the nature of Vairocana,
arising at death.
In meditative equipoise, constant recitation on these four mandalas;
as to the number of mantras,
recite them constantly day and night.85 Thus the five winds of the five buddhas flow through the nostrils. The way they flow is as follows. Only the coexisting wind flows freely through the left nostril, its color is a mixture of green and yellow, and it is of the element of air.
The upwardly moving wind flows freely only through the right nostril, is red in color, and is of the element of fire. The downwardly expelling wind moves freely through both nostrils, flowing forcefully through both. It is yellow and of the earth element.
The life-sustaining wind flows gently and freely through both nostrils. It is white and of the water element. The pervading wind does not flow freely through the nostrils during normal existence except at the time of death. It is pale blue in color and of the element of space. The Great Commentary speaks of the life-sustaining wind being of the element of space and green in color.
The downwardly expelling wind is of the element of gnosis and blue in color.
The coexisting wind is taught as being of the element of air and black in color.
The pervading wind is of the water element and white. There are, therefore, discrepancies in the colors of four winds and in the elements of three of the above winds.
Similarly the Great Commentary speaks of the winds divided into the five elements flowing in sequence and of their own accord through left, right, and both nostrils. There is, therefore, disagreement in the way wind flows through the nostrils. Hidden tantras and their commentaries, including the Sandhivyākaraṇa Tantra,86 speak only of four winds — fire, water, earth, and air — flowing of their own accord through the nostrils during normal existence, and that each flow is 900 breaths.
In this way, with flows following each other, each of the four winds flows 900 times multiplied by six in a single day. Moreover each set of 900 breaths is divided into four sets of 225 winds — one for each of the four goddesses.
The Drop of Freedom says:
Each of the four mudrās is of 225,
which added together comes to 900.
And of that, twenty-four movements
makes two times 10,000 plus 1,600.87
The winds of the four goddesses are correlated with the winds of the minor elements.
Also, according to the hidden tantras, apart from the time of death, there is no flow of wind in the central channel during normal existence.88 The Great Commentary, on the other hand, explains that 1,800 breaths less fifty-six and a quarter flow through the nostrils during the flow of each of the winds of the five elements, and that at the time of the changeover of the major wind movements at the navel and the changeover of the flow between left and right nostril, fifty-six and a quarter breaths of wind flow from the central channel.
Furthermore the hidden tantras talk only of the winds of the four elements flowing freely or predominantly through the nostrils and do not mention the flow of the space-element wind. This is in conflict with the Great Commentary, which talks of the flow of the space-element wind. The hidden tantras talk of 900 breaths flowing during each period of the four winds, each of which moves to other element mandalas six times, making in total twenty-four wind movements. The Great Commentary talks of 1,743 3/4 breaths flowing during each period of the winds of the five elements, each period changing from element to element twelve times to form the twelve major wind movements. These, therefore, are discrepancies in the number of breaths within each flow and in the number of wind movements.
The hidden tantras say that except for the moment of death and while on the path, the winds do not flow in the central channel. The Great Commentary says that even during normal existence wind flows in the central channel. These are the discrepancies. An explanation of the thinking behind presentations as given here and in other tantras This has two outlines:
1.Abhayākaragupta’s explanation
2.A presentation of statements by other scholars and their meanings
Abhayākaragupta’s explanation Explanations from the hidden tantras are definitive, while those from the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries that comment on Kālacakra and others are interpretive and not to be taken literally. In the twenty-first chapter of the Sheaves of Oral Transmission, he explains that the space-mandala wind flows only as a secondary accompaniment to the other four winds, thereby rejecting that it flows of its own accord separately from the four other winds. This he does by quoting from A Lantern of Condensed Practice and backing that up with scriptural reference from the Vajra Garland Tantra, Sandhivyākaraṇa Tantra, and the Triumph of Nonduality Tantra. The teachings in the Kālacakra are interpretive, as they are based upon the views of Sūryaratha and other disciples.
How are they to be interpreted?
The twenty-first chapter of Sheaves of Oral Transmission says: The fifth element of space is pervasive, and so only flows at the times of the four mandalas flowing at the four places. It was therefore not taught as being separate.
This was spoken of by the venerable Āryadeva:
“From the openings of the vajra and lotus, rays of light rise and travel upward to flow from the tip of the nose.
Within them the four mandalas of the elements of earth, water, fire, and air are exhaled. The pervading wind does not emerge, it is together with the pervading rays of light”89
This quote of Āryadeva continues until “One element mandala pervades four elements.”90 Abhayākaragupta validates this position by quoting from the Sandhivyākaraṇa Tantra:
In the Sandhivyākaraṇa it says:
“The recitations of Pāṇḍarā and so forth,
225 multiplied by four,
are the four yogas — 900 in each.”
“That taught as 900,
by twenty-four similar kinds,
totals 21,600.”91
This speaks of the number of breaths in the wind movements.
Concerning the validating quote from the Vajra Garland, the text continues:
By including them in space, the Vajra Garland speaks only of the flow of four mandalas.
“For the ‘mustard seed at the tip of the nose,’92
focus on prāṇāyāma,
dwell within prāṇāyāma,
meditate as buddhas, the five rays of light
arising through the nose.”
The Vajra Garland quote is continued until “The nature of the five wisdoms.”93
Concerning the validating quote from the Triumph of Nonduality, the text says:
Similarly, in the Triumph of Nonduality Tantra it says:
“That which the letter ya symbolizes
is practiced by those who desire siddhis.
With the three letters ra and so forth,
engage in the welfare of others.
“In mandalas of fire, air, earth, and water,
two activities in half a session at a time.”94 These quotes establish that within the flows of wind of the four element mandalas, the space-mandala wind does not flow independently or predominantly during normal existence. It can be inferred from the above that Abhayākaragupta would also not accept as literal the presentations of the channels and winds as found in the Condensed Tantra and the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries where they disagreed with the root and explanatory hidden tantras. Presentations, therefore, found in the Bodhisattva Commentaries on the Kālacakratantra and so forth are explained as being subject to interpretation. Sheaves of Oral Transmission continues:
In the Kālacakra the space mandala spoken of separately is there to lead disciples such as Sūryaratha and others who cling to Tīrthika views to the definitive meaning.
It is wholly in need of interpretation and intentionally equivocal, like the teaching on the arrangement of the three world realms in the upper regions of Meru asserted by those who follow Varaha.95 However the wise and others have said that in the Kālacakra and the commentaries that follow it, there are many presentations that contradict the three vehicles, and that those responsible for these texts, possessing the names of Yaśas, Puṇḍarīka, Vajragarbha, and Vajrapāṇi, are not bodhisattvas at all.
Therefore, as all contradictions have not been resolved, you may ask what is the point in trying to resolve part of the contradictions? Those parts of the Kālacakra that do not contradict other tantras of the doctrine, I follow as I would my own.
Some contradictions I have resolved because they are adapted to the minds of certain disciples.
As to the rest, although the contradictions are not resolved, it has been explained at great length that there are no faults in these at all and so therefore they are acceptable.96
“The wise” mentioned in the above quote refers to Ācārya Śāntipa, and “others” refers to other Indians.
The questio, “Therefore, as all contradictions have not been resolved, you may ask what is the point in trying to resolve part of the contradictions” expresses the following doubt. The Kālacakra and those texts known as the Bodhisattva Commentaries have been refuted by Śāntipa and other scholars. Therefore all contradictions have not been resolved, and so what is the point in you, Abhayākaragupta, persevering in resolving contradictions in parts of the text? This doubt is cleared up by the lines that follow, beginning with “Those parts of the Kālacakra.”
A presentation of statements by other scholars and their meanings
Scholars  say that it is not right to posit as interpretive those presentations from the Kālacakra on the formation of the world realms and on channels and winds and so forth that conflict with the Abhidharma tradition and the hidden tantras.
If it were, then almost everything taught in the eighth, ninth, and tenth summaries from the Realms chapter would have to be explained from the point of view that it does not exist as literally taught.
In the Inner chapter also, many presentations on channels, winds, etc., would not be literal.
Therefore, in the remaining chapters, it also becomes very difficult to settle almost anything as being literally true.
They go on to say that although the explanations from the Kālacakra and from the hidden tantras disagree, they should both be accepted as being definitive and should be explained as such. How is that to be explained?
Lantern Illuminating the Five Stages says:
However, according to the explanatory tantra of the Guhyasamāja, in half the breaths of a day there are twelve wind movements at the nostrils.
According to the Saṃvaraudbhava there are eight,  and according to the Kālacakra, except for 675 breaths, there are twelve wind movements at the nostrils in a whole day. Are these statements contradictory?
Although the tradition of Guhyasamāja has been explained by the Oral Tradition of Mañjuśrī and by Nāgārjuna and his disciples, it has been done so in its own context. The Saṃvaraudbhava, too, exists for the purpose of its own tantra. Therefore it is inappropriate to explain the meanings of those statements together.
Concerning the flow of breath through the nostrils, it seems difficult to say that one tradition can be verified and that another cannot. They are taught, therefore, according to the needs of disciples and should not be held as being contradictory.98
This is how it should be understood.
Moreover the validity as expressed in the explanatory tantras of the Guhyasamāja, such as the Vajra Garland and Sandhivyākaraṇa is as explained in the Lantern Illuminating the Five Stages. As for the Kālacakra, put aside all assertions that the Kālacakratantra and the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries are not valid. From the perspective that they are indeed valid texts, Abhayākaragupta is not correct when he presents the winds, etc., as taught in the Kālacakra as interpretive and not to be taken literally. The second summary from the Realms chapter states:
The Vajra Vehicle, in accord with the mentality of sentient beings, lies hidden as vajra words in the King of Tantras.99 Thus in the root hidden tantras, the meanings are taught in an unclear or hidden style.
Further on it says:
In this the Kālacakra Original Buddha,100 the Conqueror has clarified the vajra words by very clearly teaching, explaining, and well explaining.101 As proof of that, the process of the signs of smoke, etc., in the mahāmudrā meditation is very clear.102
These and further quotes establish that the profound meanings, which are obscured in other hidden tantras, are taught clearly in the Original Buddha and are to be understood literally. Therefore the teachings on the winds and so forth must also be accepted literally. But how can both of these conflicting presentations be taken literally?
In the two types of tantras the presentations on normal-existence channels, winds, and so forth and the practices on the paths of generation and completion are taught differently,  and this is because they were taught on the basis of the primary intended disciples of each tantra.
There are, therefore, two distinct presentations. Firstly, the four-continent world realm with its measurements, colors, and so forth, explained differently from the Abhidharma tradition and other tantras, arises as the dominant result103 of the common karma of the primary intended disciples of the Śrī Kālacakratantra. How it arises is taught in the Great Commentary and was explained earlier.
Similarly the dimensions of the body and the individual colors of its constituents correlating with the outside world, plus the channels and winds within the body and the way the winds move through the individual cakras and through the nostrils, all arise as the results of the ripening karma of those same disciples. These phenomena exist, therefore, as actual situations.
This external world and the inner world of sentient beings with body, speech, and mind are the bases of purification practice. The presentations of the path correlating with those phenomena, and the winds, channels, and drops of these primary disciples existing as they are taught in the tantra and its commentaries, form a basis upon which the penetrating activities of the completion stage are practiced. From such practices, the winds of the left and right channels enter the central channel, thereby inducing the empty forms and unchanging bliss. As these processes are taught in the Śrī Kālacakratantra, so they actually exist. The fifty-ninth verse of the Inner chapter says:
Therefore the 156 are channels that dwell in the nature of the Kālacakra gods and goddesses and that bring death to ordinary beings.
Together with the channels of the six families, the 162 channels, in the nature of the six Kālacakra wheels, bring bliss to the yogi when meditated upon.104
This passage teaches that the 156 channels comprise the thirty-two channel petals of the secret place, sixty-four of the navel, eight of the heart, thirty-two of the throat, sixteen of the forehead, and four of the crown.
These are visualized as 156 lotus-seated gods and goddesses and meditated upon. Likewise the three upper channels of the left, right, and middle plus the three lower channels of fluid, excrement, and urine are visualized and meditated upon as the six families. This generation-stage practice ripens the continuum and the meditations of the six-branched yoga of the completion stage, which penetrates the channels, winds, and drops and brings the yogi to ultimate happiness. The Great Commentary says on the fifty-eighth verse of the Inner chapter:
The six channels are the time channels. When meditated upon in accord with the guru’s instruction, the fear of death will be destroyed. To the yogi this is nothing special.105 The “instruction” refers to the six-branched yoga.
Regarding the sixtieth verse the Great Commentary says:
Above, the moon, sun, and Rāhu dwell in the paths of the left, right, and center.
Below, divided into moon, sun, and Agni, they dwell in the paths of excrement, urine, and fluid.
These the yogi protects in the body.
“By the precepts of the guru.” The precepts of the guru are the six-branched yoga, which will bring protection from death.
“They bring death to living creatures” because these six are entered by the winds.
If the winds enter the six, at that time and at all times men will definitely be destroyed by death.
Among the six is “the subtle” or the central avadhūtī. If the winds do not enter “the subtle,” “how will the yogis destroy the realm of death?” Definitely they will not destroy the realm of death.106 Therefore, if the yogi does not induce the winds into the central channel by way of the six-branched yoga, the ultimate result of deathlessness is unobtainable. Secondly, the presentation of the channels and winds of normal existence, plus the stages along the paths of generation and completion, as found in the root and explanatory hidden tantras, exist on the basis of their intended disciples and therefore are to be taken literally. This is done as follows.
For the primary disciples that the root and explanatory hidden tantras are intended for, the dominant result of their common karma is this four-continent world with its measurements and shape as taught in the Abhidharma tradition and in the root and explanatory hidden tantras, together with commentaries on their meanings unraveled by the great masters. That this world exists as a reality is clearly the thinking of the tantras and sutras.
That it is also the thinking of the Kālacakra is taught by the words of the commentary that begin “In a cave of five cubits,” which was explained earlier.
Likewise, as taught in the hidden tantras and commentaries, the aggregates, realms, and sensory sources, and particularly the channels and winds, together with the way the winds move through the channel petals and the nostrils, all exist in reality as the ripening results of the common karma of the primary disciples intended for the root and explanatory hidden tantras.
Celestial palaces are meditated upon as correlating with the external world as it exists; the aggregates, realms, and sensory sources are meditated upon as being of the nature of gods and goddesses;
and in particular, the channels, winds, and drops are meditated upon as being of the nature of male and female heroes. These generation-stage meditations ripen the continuum of the mind. The channels, winds, and drops, existing exactly as they are taught, are penetrated by the meditations of the completion stage, whose ultimate development results in the two bodies of a buddha.
Conversely, if one correlates with and focuses upon an external world and an inner world of channels and so forth that do not actually exist, it will be difficult to attain any kind of result.
Therefore, because of the separate and different types of karma of the two kinds of intended disciples, differences arose in the external worlds and the internal worlds of channels, winds, and so forth. Because of these differences, two ways of traveling the path arose — the method of the masters of India who explained the meanings of the hidden tantras, and the method of the followers of the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries.
།དེ་ལྟར་ནང་གི་རྣམ་གཞག་ཅུང་ཟད་ཙམ་ཞིག་བཤད་ཟིན་ཏོ།།།།This has been a brief explanation of the presentation of the inner world.

དབང་གི་ལེའུ། Initiations
དབང་གི་རྣམ་གཞག་བཤད་པ།

Qualifications of Master and Disciple
Initiations
This has three outlines:
1.By whom and upon whom initiations are bestowed: The definitions of master and disciple 2.Where the initiations are bestowed: A description of the mandala 3.Presentation of the initiations to be bestowed
By whom and upon whom initiations are bestowed: The definitions of master and disciple This is under two headings: 1.By whom initiations are bestowed: A definition of a master
2.Upon whom initiations are bestowed: A definition of the disciple A definition of a master
This is under three headings:
1.Definition of a guru to be relied upon
2.Characteristics of those unsuitable to be gurus
3.Ways of devoting oneself to someone who has become one’s guru, plus exceptional circumstances Definition of a guru to be relied upon The second verse of the Initiations chapter from the Condensed Tantra says:
Firstly, the guru to devote oneself to keeps his vows, dwells within the Vajra Vehicle, meditates upon the reality,1
is unattached, untainted, and of a patient nature,
has entered the path, shows the path to the disciples, and takes away the fear of hell. From reality he is of the brahmacarya,
and for māra he is the vajra club. Such a one is known as a heroic vajra mind upon this earth.2 This passage speaks of the qualified guru.
His qualities will be briefly explained.
To request an initiation, one must first rely upon a guru.
What kind of guru should one rely on?
One who keeps both interpretive and definitive samaya3 and one who dwells within the path of the Vajra Vehicle, the highest secret mantra. This means to possess the mantra vows from the initiation of Kālacakra.
“Meditates upon the reality” means one who meditates upon the Kālacakra completion stage preceded by the generation stage. “Unattached” means to have no attachment for wife, children, and so forth, and no regard for his own body.
“Untainted” means to be untainted by desire, anger, ignorance, pride, jealousy, and miserliness. “Of a patient nature” means to have no regard for the fruits of fame and wealth but to be occupied instead by the welfare of the disciples.
“Has entered the path” means that he has entered the general Mahayana path.
“Shows the path to the disciples, and takes away the fear of hell” means that by showing the perfect path to those disciples who rely upon him as a guru, it becomes possible to remove the fears of hell.
“From reality he is of the brahmacarya”4 means that from meditating upon emptiness he has attained the unmoving brahmacarya, the supreme unchanging bliss.
“For māra he is the vajra club” means that in destroying the four types of māras he is like the vajra club. The four kinds of māras are the aggregates, the delusions, death, and the devaputra.5 One who possesses these qualities is famed as a heroic vajra mind upon the earth. These are the characteristics of a vajra master to be relied upon. Furthermore the Great Commentary, commenting on the second verse of the Initiations chapter of the Condensed Tantra, quotes a text that says:
Stable, disciplined, and of intelligence,
patient, honest, free from deception, knows mantra and the yogas of tantra,
is compassionate, wise in the commentaries,
knows well the ten activities,
is wise in mandala drawing,
a master skilled in teaching tantra,
of great faith and with senses tamed.6
This quote also teaches the characteristics of a vajra master.
These are not difficult to understand.
The ten activities mentioned in the line “knows well the ten activities” taught in the last chapter of An Adornment to the Vajra Essence Tantra :
The two rituals for repelling,
the secret and wisdom-knowledge, the ritual of separating, the ritual food,
vajra recitation, the ritual of wrathful expression,
consecration, mandala meditation, these are the ten secret activities.
Mandala, meditative concentration, mudrā, standing posture, seated posture, recitation,
the fire ritual, activity yoga, concluding.
These are the ten outer activities.7
The detailed meanings of these can be known from A Commentary on the Fifty Verses on the Guru, composed by the Omniscient Master.8 Such a person, therefore, endowed with such characteristics is suitable to be a guru and is capable of bestowing initiations and so forth.
These characteristics may be further divided into those possessed by a fully ordained monk, those possessed by a novice monk, and those possessed by a layperson.
Among these three types of persons worthy of being a vajra master, a fully ordained monk is the best, a novice monk is second best, and a layman the lowest of the three.
Therefore, when all three are present, it is the fully ordained monk that one should rely upon as one’s guru.
Moreover kings should rely upon fully ordained monks as gurus, because if they rely upon laymen, it will bring harm to the teachings.
How will this happen?
If a layman is taken as a guru even though a fully ordained monk worthy of being a vajra master is accessible, the people will lose respect for the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, which in turn will lead to the disappearance of the doctrine.
The Great Commentary, on the second verse of the Initiations chapter, quotes passages that say:
“Of the three who know well the ten activities, the full monk is the best,
the novice is second best,
the householder the lowest.”
Similarly:
“Except for those on ārya levels, kings should not take householders as gurus.
Of those whose learning is complete,
who perform deeds of those possessing the signs,
except for those upon ārya levels,
venerating vajra masters while they live as householders
will bring disrespect for Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.”
“For consecrating temples and so forth,
from among those possessing the signs,
if all three are in one place,
the white-clothed householder is not the one.”
Therefore, by examining the master in many ways, disciples should devote themselves to a master as taught by the buddha.9
Therefore, knowing the characteristics of a guru worthy of devotion, one should seek out the proper guru. Characteristics of those unsuitable to be gurus The third verse of the Initiations chapter says:
Proud, ruled by anger, and lacking vows,
greedy, without knowledge, working to deceive disciples, a mind that has fallen from great bliss,
without initiation, totally attached to wealth, unaware, of harsh and coarse words, filled with carnal desire,
the wise disciples should abandon taking such people as causes of complete enlightenment as they would abandon hell.10 People with such faults are not fit to be relied upon as gurus in the Vajra Vehicle.
Even if one takes such a person as a guru and requests initiations and so forth, there can be no meaningful receiving of the initiation.
Moreover one will become infected by a measure of his faults and fall from all elevated status in this and future lives.
Most of the above verse is easy to understand. “Without knowledge” means to be without the essential teachings on the six-branched yoga, for example.
“Working to deceive his disciple” means to delude disciples by telling lies.
“A mind that has fallen from the great bliss, without initiation” means that without having received the initiation he is bestowing, he nevertheless teaches it to others.
“Filled with carnal desire” means working only for the pleasure gained from the sexual union of the two organs. Therefore the way to rely upon a guru is firstly to know the characteristics worthy and unworthy of devotion and then to examine thoroughly who is and who is not fit to be a guru.
The Great Commentary says on the second verse of the Initiations chapter:
Disciples who wish to gain worldly and nonworldly powers by way of mantra should first devote themselves to a guru. Furthermore one should examine the vajra master thoroughly. One should thoroughly examine his words.
Otherwise, relying upon a guru unexamined, the disciples’ dharma will be perverse, and perverse dharma will send them to hell.11
Also the Paramārthasevā says:
He, omniscient in the complete Vajra Vehicle, has said that very wished-for siddhi
follows the master. If perfect disciples examine the master, therefore, as they would gold,
they will not accrue even the tiniest of faults.12 However what should one do if one already regards as a guru someone endowed with those unworthy characteristics?
The Great Commentary says:
In mantra, even though one has taken as a guru a person with the faults of pride and so forth, wise disciples, meaning those of intelligence, will abandon him as a cause of complete enlightenment as they would abandon hell.13
Because of these words, even though he has been taken as a guru, if he does these wrong deeds, disciples who strive for freedom should leave him.14
A passage quoted in the Great Commentary says:
Without compassion, angry and malicious, arrogant, grasping, uncontrolled, and boastful,
the intelligent disciple will not take such a one as guru.15 Therefore, if one has taken someone with these faults as a guru, then the disciple who is seeking freedom should part company with him and not associate with him again. These quotes from the Great Commentary teach just this point and this point only.
They do not teach that one should lose one’s faith due to seeing faults because, as it is so rightly said:
Once that is used as a reason and one casts off the undertaking of holding him as a guru and as a field of reverence, one opens up the opportunity for a root downfall to occur. One must learn, therefore, to distinguish what is to be developed from what is to be discarded.16
Some explain the two instances of the phrase “taken as a guru” in the two Great Commentary passages above as applying to gurus taken by others.
What should one do if a qualified lama with all characteristics cannot be found?
The Paramārthasevā says:
In these troubled times faults and good qualities in gurus are mixed.
None are completely without fault. The disciples will come to rely upon
those discovered, after careful examination, to have a predominance of good qualities.17
As this quote says, even if one is unable to find someone possessed of all the worthy characteristics of a lama, one should rely upon those whose good qualities predominate.
In particular, it is essential that they have received the complete initiation, hold the tantric vows, and are wise in the rituals of initiation.
Ways of devoting oneself to someone who has become one’s guru, plus exceptional circumstances This is under two headings:
1.Ways of devoting oneself to a guru
2.Exceptional circumstances
Ways of devoting oneself to a guru The Great Commentary says: Monks who wear the saffron robes should prostrate to the vajra master at all times.18 Fifty Verses on the Guru also states:
With great faith and at all times,
with flower mandalas, and with palms pressed together devote yourself to the teacher guru,
bowing your head to his feet.19
As these quotes state, at all times, morning, noon, and night, devote yourself to the guru by bowing your head to the feet of one who has shown you the path of the Vajra Vehicle by bestowing upon you initiations and so forth.
Is this then a partial prostration?
It is not, because the mandala decorated with flowers is offered before pressing the palms together and prostrating.
What exactly is meant by devotion?
The Great Commentary says:
“Firstly, the guru to devote oneself to” means devoting yourself by pleasing him with your children, wife, and so forth.20
Fifty Verses on the Guru also says:
If to one’s samaya master one devotes oneself constantly by giving that which is not to be given — one’s children, one’s wife, and one’s life —
what need to mention fleeting wealth.21 In the first chapter of the second section of the Sampuṭa Tantra it says: Prostrate and offer
your wife, your daughter,
your maids, and manservants.
Pledge, “All that I own,
with a mind of faith, I offer to the guru.
From this day on I offer myself
to you as servant.”22
As the quotes indicate, you should serve the lama with offerings ranging from your possessions to your own life.
The way to accomplish that and the benefits of doing so are taught in Fifty Verses on the Guru:
Whatever is in the smallest way beautiful,
whatever is extraordinarily special,
offer it all to the guru.
Such giving becomes constant giving to every enlightened being.
Such giving is the accumulation of merit,
from which comes the supreme accomplishment.23
Furthermore the reason why one should please the guru by offering even one’s own body is stated in the same text:
Because the state of a buddha,
so hard to reach even over millions of eons,
is given in this very life to those who strive.24
Therefore you should please the guru in many ways with wealth and devotion. Exceptional circumstances The Great Commentary says:
Monks who wear the saffron robes should prostrate to the vajra master at all times. To householders and to novices, except at times of teaching, they should not. As it is said:
“To avoid criticism from the worldly,
place the holy dharma in front of one,
and to householders and to novices,
holders of vows should mentally prostrate.”
Similarly:
“Avoiding lowly tasks and prostration, holders of vows should make their devotions
by arranging his seat, rising in his presence,
and helping with his needs.”25
Therefore, if one is a householder or novice of the same status as a fully ordained vajra master, how should one act?
One should avoid lowly acts, such as washing his feet, and one should not perform the five-limbed prostration,26 but when the guru visits, one should perform devotions of offering gems, money, and so forth.
At times of teaching, in order to avoid criticism from the worldly, prostrate to the holy dharma and so forth in front of one.27
The two verses beginning, “To avoid criticism from the worldly” and “Avoiding lowly tasks and prostration” appear in Fifty Verses on the Guru as they are quoted here in the Great Commentary. Therefore they must both have been taken from the same tantra.
The above are exceptions to the previously taught ways of devotion.
When one is a monk and one’s vajra master is a householder, or when one is a fully ordained monk and one’s vajra master, although a monk, is not fully ordained and thus a novice, one should arrange his seat, rise in his presence, cater to his needs, and perform other such devotions, but one should not prostrate or perform lowly tasks such as washing his feet.
Also, when one’s guru is a householder or novice and is teaching,  one places a volume of the holy dharma or a statue in front of oneself and physically prostrates to it while in one’s mind prostrating to the guru.
The Great Commentary explains that the reason why a fully ordained monk should not prostrate to a householder or to a new monk who is not fully ordained is to prevent the people from losing faith in the doctrine.
On this point the omniscient master  says that the teaching on not prostrating was taught to prevent a loss of faith in the doctrine, and therefore, on occasions where the possibility of such a loss does not exist, a fully ordained monk should always prostrate to his householder or novice-monk vajra master.28 However, in the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary, when describing the food and drink ritual of the thirty-six kinds of maidservants, it says:
If a householder or a novice monk becomes one’s guru, during teachings the fully ordained holder of vows places the holy dharma and so forth in front and prostrates. However, at times other than teaching, that is not the case.
At these other times, lowly tasks and prostrations should be avoided, while every other devotion, such as rising before he enters, arranging his seat, and so forth, should be performed. Lowly tasks, such as washing his feet as well as verbal and mental prostrations, are to be avoided, and devotions are to be made with offerings of wealth. This is to be done by the fully ordained for the householder and novice monk.29 This passage says that at times other than at teachings the fully ordained should not prostrate, even verbally and mentally, to his householder or novice-monk vajra master.
I think this needs some investigation.
Furthermore “novice” refers only to being a novice monk, because the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary explains that a fully ordained monk should prostrate to his fully ordained vajra master, even though the master be younger in learning and so forth.
This can be known from the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary further on from the previous quote, where it says: The fully ordained monk who has received the initiation of a vajra master and become the vajra-holder guru is to be prostrated to by fully ordained monks at all times.30 Upon whom initiations are bestowed:
A definition of the disciple Disciples to be gathered by a completely qualified vajra master are of three kinds — lowest, middling, and best. Of the first kind, the Great Commentary says:
The lowest are not to be brought together by initiation but by lay disciplines.31 Similarly the Hevajra Tantra states:
First they are given purification practice,32
then the ten areas of practice.
They are taught the Vaibhāṣika tenets,
then the Sautrāntika, followed by Yogacāra,
and finally the Madhyamaka.33 Of low intelligence are those whose minds are yet to be ripened by any of the three vehicles.
Initially they are gathered by lay disciplines and gradually led to the Madhyamaka view.
Middling disciples have minds ripened by the path of the common vehicle. They are also attracted by the Vajra Vehicle, but they have no desire for the supreme siddhi of mahāmudrā in this life and strive only for various siddhis such as those of “peaceful activity” and common siddhis such as the eight siddhis.
They are of middling intelligence, and in order to lead them into the meditations of the generation stage, they are gathered only by the seven initiations of childhood.34 The Great Commentary says:
Those who strive for the accomplishment of worldly powers are to be gathered by the seven initiations in order to bring them to the meditations upon mantra, mudrā, and mandala. This is the merit of the middling disciple.35
On the best disciple the Great Commentary says:
Those who strive for the mahāmudrā are to be gathered by the initiations of the vase, the secret, and so forth, in order to bring them to the meditations of the path of emptiness.36 Therefore those possessed of characteristics such as determination to attain the mahāmudrā siddhi and other characteristics taught in the tantra are gathered by the bestowal of the eleven initiations followed by the higher initiations of the vase, the secret, and so forth. What are the characteristics of this disciple as taught in the tantra?
The fourth verse of the Initiations chapter of the Condensed Tantra says:
A disciple with a mind for the profound and the vast, taking joy in the certainties of the guru, with the spirit of renunciation, a knowledge of the qualities, striving for freedom,
respect for the tantras, of an undistracted mind,
of that received well hidden, whose friends of the wicked become weaker.37 This verse teaches the characteristics of the disciple. The following lines teach how such a disciple is gathered by a guru:
Such a one is gathered by the very wise gurus,
with the wisdom initiation and so forth as the cause.38 To explain roughly these characteristics:
in the line “a mind for the profound and the vast,” profound refers to compassion without apprehension, or the gnosis of unchanging bliss and emptiness. Vast refers to aspected emptiness, or empty form endowed with every supreme aspect. These two, the vast and the profound, are indivisible. The disciple has “a mind for” and strives for the profound and vast.
“Taking joy in the certainties of the guru” means to be free of the fourteen root downfalls and to take joy in the ten virtues.
“With the spirit of renunciation” means to have left behind the busy life and to have no regard for wealth and possessions.
“A knowledge of the qualities” means to have an unshakable faith in the Three Jewels.
“Striving for freedom” means to have no regard for the attainment of worldly siddhis, such as those of peace, and to strive only for nonworldly siddhis.
“Respect for the tantras” means guarding the vows taught in the tantras.
“Of an undistracted mind” means not to be distracted by or content with the worldly paths of the generation stage and so forth.
“Of that received well hidden” means that for as long as it falls outside the realm of one’s experience, all profound instruction received on the completion stage is kept well hidden.
The “wicked” in the line “whose friends of the wicked become weaker” refers to those who live lives of nonvirtue, such as householders, and who work for material gain. Their “friends” are the paths of the ten nonvirtues, and in the disciple these become “weaker.”
To summarize, the best disciple is one whose mind has been purified by the Mahāyāna mind39 along with other practices of the common path, and who has completed the generation stage.
Alternatively, if the generation stage has not been completed, the best disciple is one who has received the seven initiations of childhood to ripen the mind for the generation stage and who has no desire to attain the common powers but strives from the depths of his heart to achieve the supreme siddhi of mahāmudrā. Description of the Mandala Where the initiation is bestowed: A description of the mandala
Ghaṇṭāpāda said:
Before the initiation, the mandala,
these are the words of Vajradhara.40 The seven initiations taught here and the vase and other initiations taught elsewhere are bestowed in mandalas of colored powder and other substances, whereas the vase initiation and the other higher initiations taught here are to be conferred in mandalas constructed from the body of the mudrā consort, the female organ, or bhaga, and the bodhi mind.
The Great Commentary says:
For the accomplishment of gnosis, the Buddha spoke of three other mandalas:
“The body, bhaga, and mind,
by vajras of body, speech, and mind,
become three kinds of mandala,
the other of five colors is not used.”
Therefore, to attain the great bliss, and for the supreme initiation, the mandala of colored powder is not used.41 Generally, for the initiations of the five tathāgatas, many kinds of mandalas have been described. These include those of colored powder, those drawn on cloth, body mandalas, and mandalas of meditative concentration.
Concerning the mandala for the bestowal of the seven initiations as described here, some lamas say that the disciple of middling intelligence is first initiated or ripened by the seven initiations of water, crown, and so forth, in external mandalas of colored powder, drawn on cloth, cast in metal, or in three dimensions, and so forth.
However this should be understood in terms of normal and exceptional circumstances.
Usually the seven initiations as taught here are only to be bestowed in mandalas of colored powder.
A Short Teaching on Initiations says:
These seven initiations are given
with mandala constructed.42 And Nāropa’s commentary states:
These seven initiations are only to be given in mandalas of colored powder and not in those drawn on cloth and so forth.43
Sādhuputra’s commentary to the same text says:
The seven initiations are bestowed only in mandalas of colored powder and not in mandalas drawn on cloth and so forth, because these were not taught by the Buddha in the tantras.44 There are exceptions.
In the Great Commentary, regarding verse 200 of the Initiations chapter of the Condensed Tantra, it says:
“Lacking the material” refers to bestowing initiations upon ascetic disciples. In such cases, if there is no material for these disciples, the guru “bestows the initiations without material, and by the words of the victorious master they are given to ascetics.” This means that the seven initiations are given in order, and then the three, beginning with the vase, are given.
“Similarly the fourth, with the paths of smoke and so forth” is to be given. Thus it is written.45
For ascetic disciples,46 even when there are no materials for the drawing of the colored-powder mandala, it is taught that the master bestows the eleven initiations in their entirety. Therefore it is acceptable for ascetic disciples to be given the seven initiations in mandalas of meditative absorption and so forth. These are exceptions.
Also it says in the third summary from the Realms chapter:
I will lead you into this mandala palace of the conqueror Kālacakra and bestow upon you worldly and nonworldly initiations.47
Thus Sūryaratha and the other ṛṣi were lead into and initiated inside a mind-created mandala of the five precious substances.
This too was an exception. It may be wondered if the mention of ascetic disciples in the commentary refers to the bestowing of initiation on ascetic disciples who lack the necessary wealth to be used as an offering for the initiation, and that even for these ascetic disciples the seven initiations must be conferred in a mandala of colored powder.
However the meaning of the commentary passage is that the above procedure must be followed when an ascetic disciple lacks the material wealth for constructing a powder mandala.
This is so because, as Kālacakrapāda says regarding the above lines in his commentary to A Short Teaching on Initiations:
Now the seven initiations, in a mandala of colored powder previously built by those with wealth, are taken from a guru. As it is said:
“These seven initiations are given
with mandala constructed.”48
This says that the mandala of colored powder is constructed on the assumption of the presence of wealth, and that special provision must be made for ascetic disciples.
If this were not so, then the insistence on a mandala of colored powder as found in the two commentaries to A Short Teaching on Initiations would be incorrect.
A further point on this topic of using a colored-powder mandala in the seven initiations is that if the body, speech, and mind mandalas are not complete, it is acceptable to bestow the initiations using the mind mandala.
The twenty-fifth verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter of the Condensed Tantra says:
Of the types of mandalas for initiation, the outer are inferior.49 This teaches that the initiations can be bestowed using the mind mandala, without the body and speech mandalas. The Garland also says:
For initiations just the central mandala is drawn and the initiation given.50
Concerning the practices of approximation51 mentioned in the lines, “Without purification by approximation, there is no engaging in mandala activities,”52 all initiating deities are complete within the mind mandala, and so the approximation practices of the mind-mandala deities fulfill all necessary criteria.
Therefore the teaching that such practice is acceptable is correct. How are the deity approximation practices to be performed for a complete mandala of body, speech, and mind? The Great Commentary says, on the thirty-fifth verse of the Initiations chapter:
The sixteen-line mantra of the Conqueror recited ten million times accomplishes all tasks. Ten times 100,000 fire rituals will achieve all of the eight great siddhis, but before that, the approximation practices are required.53
A similar point is made for the seventy-two-line mantra.
Approximation practice, therefore, is necessary. Great scholars have said, however, that if it were necessary to recite as many approximation practice mantras as there are deities, these days it would be difficult to complete even the approximation practices. Therefore one should use a skillful approach to the practice of approximation.
How is that to be done? The Great Commentary, on the thirty-eighth verse of the Gnosis chapter of the Condensed Tantra, begins:
The text speaks of reciting mantras in order to achieve worldly siddhis. and continues until:
In this way, the mantra chains are recited each day as complete circles of breath.
Here do not count or say the mantra, but together with the breath entering and leaving, concentrate on the letters of the mantra entering and leaving, like a garland of flowers, in the nature of moon and sun, in forward and reverse order.
In this way, inwardly the yogi performs 108,000 recitations in five days.54 In five hundred days the yogi recites on 10,800,000 breaths. Then the body becomes pure. Likewise the speech is purified and similarly the mind.55
Each line of the seventy-two-line mantra chain lies between the three syllables oṃ āḥ hūḥ, which are the seeds of enlightened body, speech, and mind.
The lines are also intertwined with the syllables of the ḍākinī and ḍāka name mantras and finalized with the syllable phaṭ. The seventy-two lines of this mantra chain are joined to the winds of the sixty minor movements of wind, as well as the gnosis wind that flows at the changeover point of the twelve major movements of wind. The count of corresponding in- and out-breaths are taken as the count of mantras. In this way, the count of the approximation practices also becomes the count of the breaths at the time of the mantra count. This is the assertion of a lama and great scholar , but I wonder if it is correct.56 It would be right for the discriminating to investigate. The Initiations A presentation of the initiations to be bestowed
This is under three headings: 1.The number of initiations 2.The order of initiations
3.An explanation of each initiation
The number of initiations The Vajrapāṇi Commentary of the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries states:57 Similarly, in the Ḍākinī Vajra Tent Tantra, the Conqueror taught the fourth initiation apart from the third:
“The vase initiation is the first,
the second is stated to be the secret.
Wisdom-knowledge is the third,
the fourth is not like that.”
Also in the fifteenth chapter:
“The water initiation is the first,
the crown initiation the second,
third is the ribbon empowerment,
fourth the vajra and bell,
the fifth is one’s own conduct,
name is the sixth,
the Buddha’s permission, the seventh,
the eighth is the vase initiation,
the secret initiation the ninth,
the wisdom initiation is the tenth,
reality is by the vajra yoga.”58 Here passages from the Ḍākinī Vajra Tent Tantra are quoted.
Immediately after this, the text continues:
“Reality is by the vajra yoga.” Clearly the eleventh was taught by the Conqueror principally so that the wise should understand the fourth or the eleventh initiation as separate.
This ascertains the number of initiations to be conferred. There are seven initiations, beginning with the water initiation, which proceed in accordance with the stages of childhood.
These are followed by the three higher worldly initiations of the vase, secret, and wisdom-knowledge, and finally the nonworldly higher-than-high ultimate fourth initiation.
There is a reason for determining the number of initiations. This concerns the type of person to be gathered by the vajra master giving initiation. There are those who for the time being seek only worldly siddhis and, therefore, wish to practice only the generation stage. Then there are those who seek only the supreme siddhi and, therefore, seek the practices of the completion stage.
For the first of these types, only the seven childhoodlike initiations are conferred.
The second type of person starts their meditations on the generation stage and, when that is perfected, practices the meditations of the completion stage in their entirety.
For such a person all eleven initiations are bestowed.
Just these eleven and no more are required to create suitable vessels for the meditation paths of these two types of persons.
The number of initiations is also ascertained as eleven in A Short Teaching on Initiations:
First, the seven initiations
for the children to enter by:
three by worldly convention,
the fourth by ultimate reality.59
Also, farther on, when explaining their meanings:
The initiations of the vase and the secret,
that known as wisdom-knowledge,
and again the gnosis of that great wisdom:
change, change, and fall, and then no farther fall.60 Thus the eleventh, or the fourth counting from the vase initiation, is explained as being the ultimate nonworldly initiation.
However four higher initiations and four higher-than-high initiations have been taught, making fifteen altogether.
How is this explained?
There is no error here, because the higher vase initiation and the higher-than-high vase initiation are similar insofar as they are both vase initiations. Likewise the two secret initiations are both secret initiations. The wisdom-knowledge initiations are both wisdom-knowledge initiations.
That which is explained as the worldly fourth initiation is actually the third, or wisdom-knowledge initiation, and is given the name “fourth initiation.”
The order of initiations
The eleven initiations begin with the water initiation and end with the ultimate fourth initiation.
As Ācārya Nāgārjuna says in his Five Stages:
Well established within the generation stage,
they yearn for the stage of completion.
This method, like the steps of a ladder,
the fully enlightened Buddha has taught.61 As this verse says, one moves to the completion stage having trained well in the generation stage. This is the defined order. Similarly one must first be made into a suitable vessel for the generation-stage meditations with the seven initiations and then turned into suitable vessels for the meditations of the completion stage by means of the higher initiations.
The order of the seven initiations is also clearly defined. When a child is born, it is washed in order to help it grow.
Later its hair is tied to the top of its head. Its ears are pierced and so forth. The child is encouraged to laugh and talk, it discovers pleasures, it is given a name,62 and finally it is taught to read and write.
The seven initiations are conferred in correlation with this sequence.
The Vajragarbha Commentary says:
At birth women wash the child,
and the water initiation is given.
Its hair is tied upon its head,
this is known as the crown.
The ears are pierced, and so forth,
explained as being the ribbon initiation.
The child laughs and speaks,
the bell and vajra initiation is conferred.
The fifth, childhood pleasures, is the conduct initiation.
The name is the name initiation.
Reading and so forth is the permission.
These are given by mother and father,
of which there are seven,
known as the seven initiations.63 Therefore, because they follow in the footsteps of a child, they are taught as the seven childhood initiations.
The order of the four higher initiations is defined by the significance of a preceding initiation that necessarily leads into the following initiation.
Some say that there is no clearly defined order to the seven childhood initiations and the four higher initiations because the seven initiations must be conferred within an external colored-powder mandala, and in the higher initiations the colored-powder mandalas are rejected.
The Great Commentary says, on the first verse of the Initiations chapter:
For the ultimate truth, the colored-powder mandala is not drawn, because it was rejected by the Conqueror.
This is stated in the Original Buddha by the Conqueror:
“Construction of vajra lines, construction by colored powder also,
are not to be done within mantra reality.
If they are, enlightenment is difficult.”
And so on until:
Therefore, for the achievement of great bliss and for the giving of supreme initiation, the colored-powder mandala is not used.64
This, they say, clearly states that for the higher initiations, the colored-powder mandala is not necessary, whereas it is necessary for the seven initiations. They think, therefore, that it is acceptable to practice the six-branched yoga with just the four higher initiations and without the preceding seven initiations. This, they believe, is the intention of the tantra and its commentaries, and it seems that some past and present practitioners of the six-branched yoga practiced and continue to practice that way. This, however, is not correct.
Nāropa’s commentary to the line “these seven initiations” in A Short Teaching on Initiations says:
Within the eleven initiations mentioned in A Short Teaching are the steps to the palace of the nonworldly siddhis. These are explained as the seven lower and conventional initiations with form.65 This teaches that in the achievement of the nonworldly siddhis, which are the fruits of the higher initiations, the seven initiations are compared to steps leading to a palace. Therefore the seven initiations must precede the higher initiations. Furthermore, at the time of taking the secrecy pledges, it is commanded:
Do not speak of this to those who have not entered the mandala, or your pledges will weaken.
The mandala mentioned here has to be a colored-powder mandala.
It makes no sense for the bhaga mandala and so forth to be the first mandala that the disciple enters.
Moreover the secrets, which if revealed result in a weakening of one’s pledges, are secrets of mantra, and there are no greater secrets to be revealed than those of the higher initiations. Telling them, therefore, to those not ripened constitutes a root downfall. There are also a number of different assertions concerning the order of the higher initiations.
Some great scholars , maintain that by just the initiations of the vase and the other three higher worldly initiations, one becomes a fit vessel to listen to the tantra and to meditate upon the six-branched yoga, and that the higher-than-high initiations, including the ultimate fourth initiation, are the initiations of the vajra-master great lord,66 enabling one to teach the entire tantra.
One scholar  says that the method of bestowing the nonworldly fourth initiation is not explained here, and therefore the secret initiation and the nonultimate wisdom-knowledge initiation renders one a fit vessel for the meditations on the path of the fourth initiation. On these points the Great Commentary, discussing verse 119 of the Initiations chapter, says:
The higher initiations are of two kinds.
One kind is for leading sentient beings,67 for complete knowledge of the path, and for listening to the tantra.
The other confers the status of great vajra master and creates the teacher.
And so on until: For the purpose of leading sentient beings, there are four nonultimate initiations.68 The above passage contains explanations of the four worldly initiations and a description of the fourth as “the bliss of embrace.” The quote continues:
Then, if they have studied and know every tantra and its extensive commentary, the initiation of the great lord is conferred.
In the fifth chapter on the ultimate, the mahāmudrā gnosis will be explained extensively.
Therefore it is not taught in detail here.69 The above passages explain the four higher-than-high initiations as being the initiations of the vajra-master great lord, and that is the literal meaning of the text.
However, to become a fit vessel to listen to the tantras and so forth, the ultimate fourth initiation, in the form of a word initiation, must be bestowed.
The reason for this will be explained later. The common assertion  is that for the vajra-master lord initiation, the four higher-than-high initiations do not have to be conferred, and some 70 maintain that at the end of the first four higher initiations, just the nonworldly fourth is conferred, and for the lord initiation, the four higher-than-high initiations are not conferred.
That, however, contradicts the previous quote that runs: The other confers the status of great vajra master and creates the teacher.
Here the word “other” refers to initiations, and is the commentary to “The disciple who is a householder offers the ten consorts to the guru” and so forth.
This commentary explains that for the vajra-master lord, the higher-than-high initiations of the vase and so forth, in which one sits in union with the ten mudrās, are conferred.
They would reply that there is no fault, because for the vajra-master initiation there is the vajra-master lord initiation and vajra-master great lord initiation. Concerning the first, the Great Commentary says:
Then the disciple who knows all tantras and dwells in the pledges is initiated by the guru into vajra lord. The passage continues up to: This is the initiation ceremony of the vajra-master lord.71 At this point the ceremonies for the higher-than-high initiations have not been taught.
The second initiation, the vajra-master great lord, is explained by the Great Commentary in the passage:
Then, if they have heard and learned every tantra and its commentaries, the initiation of the great lord in its proper order is taught, and the disciple who is a householder offers the ten consorts to the guru.72 Thus they maintain that the vajra-master great lord initiation can be accepted as being the initiation ceremony of the vase and other higher-than-high initiations that include the union of the ten consorts.
One may think this way, but dividing the vajra-master initiation into a lord initiation and a great lord initiation and claiming based on the two quotes above that these two initiations are individually taught is not correct.
If it were, then there would be three kinds of higher initiations — one for listening to the tantras, one for the vajra-master lord, and one for the vajra-master great lord.
The Great Commentary, however, divides them into two:
The higher initiations are of two kinds. One kind is for leading sentient beings, for complete knowledge of the path, and for listening to the tantra.
The other confers the status of great vajra master and creates the teacher.73 Therefore the higher initiations are for listening to the tantra and so forth, and the higher-than-high initiations of the vajra-master great lord are for teaching the tantra to disciples and so forth. Furthermore, in the earlier commentary passage, there are descriptions of the disciple on whom the vajra-master lord initiation is bestowed:
Then the disciple who knows all tantras and dwells in the pledges. Wonderful guru! Because of your kindness I now know all the paths of those who have traveled to bliss.
He sees the disciple endowed with every good quality dwelling in the pledges.74
Descriptions of such a disciple also occur in the later passage:
Then, if they have studied and know every tantra and its commentaries…
The Conqueror has attained every perfection! What can I do?75 Therefore there are no differences between the earlier and later passages concerning the subject on whom the vajra-master lord initiation is conferred.
There are also no differences between the passages on the reason for conferring the vajra-master initiation.
To explain the need for the initiation, the former passage says:
The vajra-master initiation is conferred upon the monks, novice monks, and laymen, and speech permission to teach the tantra is given. The monk who is initiated into the teacher initiation.76 In the later passage Also:
To become a lord, those who wish for the level of the vajra master of the great mandala should offer the ten mudrās.77 Therefore the earlier and later passages are similar in that they both teach the purpose of the initiation to be the achievement of the status of vajra master of the great mandala — a bestower of initiations and a teacher of tantra.
Whatever the reason may be, in the earlier passage just the word “lord” appears and in the later passage the words “great lord” appear, and if these assertions arise because the word “great” might or might not appear, they are damaged by the quote in the later passage beginning “To become a lord,” which only mentions the word “lord.”
So what is the difference between the two passages?
At the beginning of this fifth summary from the Great Commentary, it says:
The rituals of consecration from the gloriously supreme Original Buddha.78 This section then is to be an explanation of consecration rituals. These include the consecration of human beings to initiate them as great lords and the consecration, or initiation, of the gods as taught by the words “Nāgas and so forth.” In this way, by explaining parts of the initiation ceremony of the great lord, the earlier passage, as well as the root tantra, is giving a condensed explanation.
That same topic is explained in detail by the root tantra and commentary in the later passages where it says:
Then, if they have studied and know every tantra and its commentaries…
For example, by giving a partial presentation of the initiations, the passage beginning “First the water” is the root tantra and commentary giving a condensed explanation of the higher initiations,79 whereas the passage beginning “The glorious wisdom śakti”80 is the root tantra and commentary giving a more detailed explanation.
Others maintain that to be empowered to listen to tantra and to practice the six-branched yoga, all four higher and all four higher-than-high initiations are to be given. This is not correct.
The Great Commentary says: The higher initiations are of two kinds. One kind is for leading sentient beings…
This leads into the subject, and continues: Concerning the higher initiations for leading sentient beings or for listening to tantra: initially the faults of fear and confusion regarding these initiations are driven from the mind.
And up to: In order to lead sentient beings, four kinds of conventional and worldly initiations are ascertained.81 This teaches that by just the four worldly higher initiations and the fourth initiation, as illustrated by the worldly fourth, one is empowered to listen to tantra and so forth. The Great Commentary, again as a lead-in, says:
The other confers the status of great vajra master and creates the teacher. Here “other” refers to the four higher-than-high initiations. Again, the Great Commentary, leading into an explanation of the higher-than-high initiations, says:
Then, if they have studied and know every tantra and its commentaries, the initiation of the great lord is conferred.
And continues: …in its proper order is taught, and the disciple who is a householder offers the ten mudrās to the guru.82 The tantra and it commentary is saying that the four higher-than-high initiations are for the sole purpose of the vajra-master great lord initiation. This contradicts the above assertion. Furthermore such an assertion would mean that the eleven initiations, comprising the four higher initiations and the seven childhood initiations plus the nonworldly fourth illustrated by the worldly fourth, would be unable to create vessels suitable for listening to the entire tantra and to practice the stages of generation and completion in their entirety, for to create such suitable vessels, separate initiations into the four higher-than-high initiations would be required.
An explanation of each initiation
This is under two headings: 1.The seven childhood initiations 2.The four higher initiations The Seven Childhood Initiations The root tantra, A Short Teaching on Initiations, states:
Water, crown, and silk ribbon, vajra and bell, great conduct,
name, and permission:
these well bestowed, great king, are the seven initiations.83 The seven initiations, from the water to the permission initiation, are the seven initiations that proceed according to childhood.
All seven are rounded off by a water ritual and are therefore known as “the seven water initiations,” but the term vase initiation84 is not used. These seven initiations are bestowed upon the disciple, who is placed opposite the four entrances to the colored-powder mandala.
In front of the northern entrance, facing the white northern form-face of the main deity, the disciple stands in the form of the body vajra.
The initiation deities then confer initiation.
This is performed in a way that differs from other tantras. The five mothers within the colored-powder mandala bestow the water initiation, and the five tathāgatas bestow the crown initiation. The disciple is then led to the southern entrance to be in front of the red speech-face of the south. There he generates himself in the form of the speech vajra and is empowered with the ribbon initiation by the ten śakti, and with the vajra and bell initiation by the main deity and consort.
The disciple is then led to the eastern entrance to face the black mind face and generates himself as the mind vajra.
There the male and female bodhisattvas confer the conduct initiation, and the male and female wrathful deities bestow the name initiation.
The disciple is led to the western entrance and faces the yellow gnosis face, where he generates himself as gnosis vajra and is initiated into the permission initiation by Vajrasattva and consort. These initiations can be illustrated by way of the water initiation. The water of the vases, which is the initiation substance, and the five elements of the disciple are generated into the five mothers. These deities melt, and the resultant vase water, in the nature of bodhicitta, is held aloft by the five mothers, who confer the water initiation. This purifies the five elements of all defilements and grants the disciple the fortune to achieve the powers of the five mothers.
Likewise the crown and the five aggregates of the disciple are generated into the five tathāgatas. The crown initiation purifies the aggregates of defilements and grants the disciple the fortune to achieve the powers of the five tathāgatas.
Phenomena of the body are purified by these two initiations, and the purifier of these phenomena is the white body-face of the main deity. The disciple, therefore, is placed at the mandala entrance opposite this face, where, in the form of body vajra, he receives the initiation.
In the ribbon initiation the ten ribbons and the ten winds of the disciple are generated as the ten śakti. The initiation purifies the ten winds so they become workable and capable of being brought into the central channel.
In the vajra and bell initiation, the vajra and bell and left and right channel are each generated as the main deity and consort. The initiation renders the winds of the left and right channel capable of being gathered into the central channel.
The ten winds and the left and right channel are phenomena of speech. Therefore the disciple is placed at the southern entrance facing the red speech-face, the purifier of these phenomena. There, in the form of speech vajra, the initiation is conferred on the disciple.
In the conduct initiation, the thumb vajra, the six sense powers, and the six sense objects of the disciple’s continuum are generated as male and female bodhisattvas. The initiation is bestowed, creating the potential to remove the defilements of sense power moving to sense object.
In the name initiation, the initiation bracelet and the action faculties and their activities85 are generated into the male and female wrathful deities. The name initiation is conferred, and seeds for the removal of the defilements of the six action faculties and their six activities are planted.
The bracelet used as initiation substance is said by Sādhuputra to be “a bracelet or garland of flowers tied around the arms and legs.”86 Phenomena purified by the conduct and name initiation are those of the mind.
The disciple, therefore, is placed at the eastern entrance in front of the black mind-face of the main deity, which is the purifier of those phenomena. There in the form of the mind vajra he receives the initiation.
In the permission initiation the phenomena to be purified are the aggregate of gnosis and the element of gnosis. The purifier is the gnosis vajra, and the disciple, therefore, is placed at the western entrance facing the yellow gnosis-face of the deity, where in the form of the gnosis vajra the actual permission to teach and so forth and the permission appendages are given.
The phenomena to be purified by the first six initiations are those of body, speech, and mind in two sets each respectively. The purifiers are the three pairs of initiations.
A Short Teaching on Initiations says:
Body, speech, and mind well purified
by pairs of initiations.87
Regarding the aggregate and element of gnosis to be purified by the permission initiation, the same tantra says: The permission purifies gnosis.88 Concerning the seven initiations purifying the elements, aggregates, and so forth, as explained above, the same tantra states:
Water is the purification of the elements, the crown purifies the aggregates,
the ribbon purifies the perfections.89 By the vajra and bell, the great unchanging,
and the unbroken voice of the Buddha,
the sun and moon are purified as one.
Purification of object and sense
is by the unmoving vajra of conduct.
Name purifies love and so forth, 90 permission purifies the very Buddha.91
These are the seven initiations.92
The meaning of “by the vajra and bell, the great unchanging,” is that the great unchanging bliss is symbolized by the vajra.
The unbroken continuum of the Buddha’s voice, which is an indestructible sound, is represented by the bell. The vajra and bell initiation is performed by the embrace of the two hands holding vajra and bell, and “the sun and moon are purified as one,” which means that the life-sustaining wind and the downwardly expelling wind that flow through the right and left channel are capable of dwelling as one within the avadhūtī. This has been taken from Nāropa’s commentary.
With the seven initiations one is empowered only to meditate upon the generation stage and its branches.
For the middling disciple who only strives for worldly powers, only these seven are conferred, and it is not proper to confer the higher initiations on them.
The Four Higher Initiations This has two outlines:
1.Ascertaining the number of initiations and the order in which they are conferred 2.A description of each initiation
Ascertaining the number of initiations and the order in which they are conferred
The Great Commentary says: The higher initiations are of two kinds. One kind is for leading sentient beings, for complete knowledge of the path, and for listening to the tantra.
The other confers the status of great vajra master and creates the teacher.93 As this quote states, these initiations are determined as being of two kinds — the higher and those that are higher than high. The reason for this division is as follows.
The primary intended disciple of the tantra, who is of the highest intelligence, listens to the complete tantra and is made into a suitable vessel for comprehensive practice of the completion stage. That is one kind of person. Having become such a suitable vessel, and whether or not the completion stage has been consummated within his mind, he comprehensively understands the meanings of the tantra and is worthy of teaching it to others. That is another type of person.
The presentation of just the higher initiations is made on the basis of conferring initiation upon the first type of person, while the presentation of the higher-than-high initiations is made on the basis of conferring initiation upon the second.
Individually, the four higher initiations are the vase initiation, the secret initiation, the wisdom-knowledge initiation, which includes the worldly fourth initiation, and lastly the nonworldly fourth initiation. These are determined as follows.
The disciple has listened to the tantra and has become a suitable vessel for all the meditations of completion stage, which consists of the six-branch yoga.
The vase, secret, and wisdom-knowledge initiations will empower the disciple to practice the first five of the six-branched yoga.
The nonworldly fourth initiation is the word initiation, and therefore empowers the disciple to practice the sixth branch of meditative concentration. The thinking of the previous passage from the Vajrapāṇi Commentary, which quotes the Ḍākinī Vajra Tent Tantra and then determines the number of initiations to be eleven, is also that these initiations are conferred in order to create suitable vessels for listening to the complete tantra and so forth.
It is the thinking of the Vajrapāṇi Commentary that the meaning of the Ḍākinī Vajra Tent Tantra verse is that, of these eleven, the eleventh is the nonworldly fourth initiation,  which is the definitive fourth initiation of the hidden tantras as taught by the line “the fourth is likewise.” A Short Teaching on Initiations also says:
Initiations of vase and secret, that known as wisdom-knowledge,
again the knowledge of great wisdom.94
Here the three higher initiations and the eleventh, or nonworldly fourth, are listed as topics to be explained. Then, as an explanation, the text continues:
Change, change, and fall, and then no farther fall.
Purification of body, speech, and mind,
the three initiations leading respectively
to the fourth, the pure gnosis. Purifying body, speech, and mind,
first a child, then a youth, and finally old,
the fourth is the master of sentient beings.95 These quotes teach the initiations that create suitable vessels for listening to and meditating on the tantra.
The lines “again the knowledge of great wisdom,” “and then no farther fall,” “to the fourth, the pure gnosis,” and “the fourth is the master of sentient beings” all teach the eleventh, or nonworldly fourth, initiation.
The two lines beginning “Initiations of vase and secret” and the lines “change, change, and fall,” “Purification of body, speech, and mind, the three initiations leading respectively,” and “Purifying body, speech, and mind, first a child, then a youth, and finally old”96 all teach the three higher initiations from the division of higher and higher than high.
This is so because, in earlier commentary on the lines beginning “Initiations of vase and secret,” Nāropa says: For those yogis to develop the conventional worldly powers, three initiations of the vase and so forth are taught as semblances of the ultimate.97
In later commentary on these lines, Nāropa quotes passages from the Condensed Tantra in its explanation of the higher initiations of vase and so forth. These run from:
Up to “direction” years, the one with ten aspects,98 >look, and touch.
And up to:
The first touch of the breasts of glorious wisdom is the initiation of the vase.
Experiencing and looking at the “moon”99 in its secret place is the secret initiation. Within the wisdom-knowledge initiation, all are purified by the families of the conquerors, and the guru, having bestowed initiation,
gives the mudrā to the disciple.100 The text of the Great Commentary on this passage is quoted and explained in Nāropa’s commentary.
The Great Commentary runs from “For the vase and the other initiations, do not leave the young mudrā for ten years” up to “The air element, being devoid of particles,101 is not to be held.
This is thereby ascertained.”102
Moreover, when Nāropa quotes the Great Commentary from “The higher initiations are of two kinds” up to “In order to lead sentient beings, four kinds of conventional and worldly initiations are ascertained,”103 he does this as commentary to “Initiations of vase and secret, that known as gnosis.” Similarly it is the position of Nāropa’s commentary that the lines beginning “Initiations of vase and secret” also teach the four higher-than-high initiations.
After explaining the vase, secret, and wisdom-knowledge initiations, Nāropa’s commentary continues:
Having briefly explained the three kinds of initiations for the accomplishment of worldly powers, the special eleventh initiation for the nonworldly powers is spoken of beginning with the words104 “and again.”105
This explains that the line “and again the gnosis of great insight” teaches the nonworldly fourth initiation.
On this line Nāropa’s commentary says: “Great insight” is the mahāmudrā, which will be explained, where nothing is posited by thought.
Its gnosis is the great unchanging bliss produced by meditating upon it. This is the eleventh. And later:
The Vajra Ḍākinī Tent Tantra also speaks of the eleven initiations.106 This leads into:
The Tent Tantra is quoted in Vajrapāṇi’s commentary:
“The vase initiation is the first.”
And so on. Nāropa’s commentary continues:
“Reality is by the vajra yoga.” Primarily, the eleventh was clearly taught by the Conqueror so that the wise should understand the fourth or the eleventh initiation as being separate.107
The fourth, or the eleventh, as mentioned in the above line “should understand the fourth or the eleventh initiation as being separate,” is the nonworldly and ultimate fourth initiation.
Moreover the decisive “the” from the phrase “also speaks of the eleven initiations” is a word that determines the number of initiations to be eleven. Therefore, to become a fit vessel for listening to the whole tantra and for meditating on the generation and completion stages in their entirety, at the end of the three higher initiations of the vase and so forth, the nonworldly fourth must be given verbally. This is the thinking of the Kālacakratantra, of its commentary, and of mahāsiddha Nāropa. Sādhuputra says the same in his Mandala Ritual:
Slowly taken by the tongue from the lotus, the mind of suchness drinks of the bodhicitta in the nature of samaya.108 This is the purification of mind, the ritual of the initiation of the wisdom knowledge.
“Then the precious word initiation is given.” After the special bliss, the bodhicitta is meditated upon and is developed after the three drops. It is totally free from all deluded thought, with no concept of any phenomena, in the nature of the great Vajradhara. This is the fourth initiation.109 This passage explains that after the three higher initiations of the vase and so forth, which are conferred to create suitable vessels for listening to the tantra and so forth, the fourth, or nonworldly, ultimate initiation is bestowed.
Therefore the words “Then the precious word initiation is given” teach that the fourth initiation is expressed in words and that the disciples’ actual understanding of the initiation is the meaning of the fourth initiation.
Therefore those  are incorrect who maintain that after the instruction, “to place the mind in total nonconceptuality in a state in which there is no fabrication of the actual way phenomena exist,” the disciple places his mind a little in nonconceptuality and that this is the bestowal of the fourth initiation.
Others ask if Sādhuputra’s description of the nonworldly fourth bestowed after the wisdom-knowledge third initiation actually refers to the higher-than-high wisdom-knowledge third initiation.
This is not so, because the lines “Then the precious word initiation is given.
After the special bliss” up to “This is the ritual of the conduct of the mind”110 teach that after the three higher initiations, the nonworldly fourth together with its appendages is given. Then, immediately after the line “This is the ritual of the conduct of the mind,” the text continues:
The receiving of every initiation, the meanings of every tantra, the path of those gone to bliss arising from hearing, thinking, and meditation, is by your kindness, glorious guru. This is the bestowing of the wisdom-knowledge initiation.111
These lines teach up to the higher-than-high wisdom-knowledge initiation together with its appendages.
Immediately after these lines, the Mandala Ritual says:
“The remaining are as the previous.”112 This line is pointing for reference to the preceding explanation given when the nonworldly fourth initiation was conferred for the purposes of creating suitable vessels. Therefore the three higher-than-high initiations, which consist of the vase initiation in which the nine consorts are embraced, the secret initiation in which the nine consorts are relied upon, and the wisdom-knowledge initiation in which one enters union with the ten consorts, are conferred after the nonworldly fourth, which comes at the end of the three suitable-vessel-creating initiations of the vase, and so forth.
Some  say that if the nonworldly fourth was necessary to create suitable vessels for the complete hearing of the tantra, then what does the following quote from the Great Commentary mean? For the purpose of leading sentient beings, there are four nonultimate initiations. Then, when they have heard and learned every tantra and its commentary…113 Does this quote not teach that in order to become fit vessels for a complete hearing of the tantra,  initiations up to the worldly fourth, in which the wisdom-knowledge initiation itself is given the name of the fourth, are sufficient?
As far as what the words of the Great Commentary actually say, such a claim is true. However, in the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary it says: First the vase initiation, the second is said to be the secret, gnosis the third, the fourth also is likewise.114 In the Hevajra Tantra Also: “The vajra master, secret, and wisdom, the fourth also is likewise.”115 In two other tantras, therefore, there are four initiations. In this commentary the fourth initiation as taught in the Later Guhyasamāja and the Hevajra Tantra are presented as topics for explanation. The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary continues: Here the worldly nonultimate vase initiation is the master initiation. By looking upon the secret place, nectar is experienced, and that is the secret initiation. The activity mudrā consort116 is given, and from the two organs arises bliss. Knowledge of this is the wisdom-knowledge initiation. The bodhicitta enters the jewel. Knowledge of its bliss is the gnosis fourth.
By worldly truths, therefore, these are the four rituals of the interpretive initiations.117 Therefore it is the thinking of the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries that this quote describes how the hidden tantras literally teach the four initiations, and that the tantra line “the fourth also is likewise” literally teaches the wisdom-knowledge initiation to be the fourth while actually teaching the ultimate nonworldly fourth initiation in a concealed way. The Great Commentary also, when explaining the four higher initiations, literally teaches an actual fourth initiation, as in the line “the fourth also is likewise,” and it has to be the thinking of the Great Commentary that the nonworldly fourth initiation, which is illustrated by this worldly fourth, is also conferred at this time in order to create fit vessels for hearing the tantra in its entirety. If this were not the case, it would contradict Sādhuputra’s explanation. Moreover it cannot be correct to say that the first three initiations are necessary for creating fit vessels for the practice of the six-branched yoga up to the yoga of recollection but that the nonworldly fourth is not necessary for creating fit vessels for the meditation upon the sixth yoga of meditative concentration. A description of each initiation This has two outlines: 1.A description of the higher initiations 2.A description of the higher-than-high initiations A description of the higher initiations This has four topics: 1.The higher initiation of the vase 2.The secret initiation 3.The wisdom-knowledge initiation 4.The worldly fourth The higher initiation of the vase “The first touch of the breasts of glorious wisdom is the initiation of the vase.” 118 As this line indicates, the guru leads the disciple to embrace and touch the breasts of a suitably qualified mudrā consort. By embracing her body and touching her breasts, the elemental bodhicitta stirs within the body. From this bliss arises, which is applied to emptiness to become the bliss and emptiness that is the nature of the vase initiation. Because it is received from the vases of the mudrā’s breasts, it is known as the vase initiation. It is also known as the initiation of the master, as the Hevajra Tantra says: By laughing, joy is attained. Pure laughing is the master.119 Also, because it is obtained by relying upon the body of a wisdom woman,120 the initiation is taken within the body mandala. The secret initiation “Experiencing and looking at the ‘moon’ in its secret place is the secret initiation.”121 The guru sits in union with a fully qualified mudrā consort. The white element at the crown melts and falls along the path of his dhūtī, where this basis of bliss is revealed at the tip of his jewel as symbolizing the inborn bliss. All the gods gather at the guru’s body, and with thumb and ring finger they place those drops in their molten state upon the tongue of the disciple for his experience. With the blindfold removed, the disciple looks upon the large lotus of the wisdom woman, and moved by great desire, the drops move within his body to create bliss. This bliss is applied to emptiness to become bliss and emptiness. This is the nature of the secret initiation. It is called a secret initiation because it is gained by the experience of secret substance and taken within the secret bhaga mandala. As it is said: By looking, joy is attained; looking is similarly the secret.122 The wisdom-knowledge initiation The disciple is presented with a fully qualified wisdom woman by the guru. In accordance with his guru’s instruction, the disciple searches for her channel, and when the indications are that it has been found, he sits in union with the wisdom lady in accord with instruction. During union the element melts and arrives at the secret-place cakra. The resulting bliss is applied to emptiness to form bliss-and-emptiness gnosis. This is the third initiation of wisdom-knowledge. Because it is gained by relying upon a wisdom woman, it is known as the wisdom-knowledge initiation, and because it is gained from the melting of the jasminelike123 bodhicitta, it is taken within the nonultimate bodhicitta mandala. When this initiation and the fourth worldly initiation are conferred using a wisdom woman, it is necessary to seek the channel of the wisdom woman. Sādhuputra mentions this in his Mandala Ritual when he says: With the finger visualized as a red hri, the left of the consort’s channel is moved, the śī on the tongue is uttered.124 The worldly fourth From sitting in union with the wisdom woman, the element moves to the vajra tip, and for as long as the state of retention can be maintained, innate bliss arises. This bliss applied to emptiness creates the gnosis of bliss and emptiness. This is the worldly fourth initiation. The line “the fourth also is likewise” literally teaches this interpretive fourth initiation, and it is labeled the fourth within the wisdom-knowledge third. In this connection the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says: The bodhicitta enters the jewel. Knowledge of its bliss is the gnosis fourth.125 The Higher-than-High Initiations This is under two headings: 1.The first three initiations 2.The nonworldly fourth The first three initiations Taken literally, the Great Commentary talks of the four higher-than-high initiations as being solely for the creation of the vajra-master lord.126 However, in order to create suitable vessels for hearing the tantra in its entirety and so forth, the nonworldly fourth has to be conferred after the three worldly higher initiations. This has to be performed as explained by Sādhuputra and is the intention of the tantra and commentary as already explained. The rituals and their order can be known from the texts on mandala rituals, so here I will just mention a few of the special characteristics of the first three initiations. In this vase initiation the disciple embraces the wisdom woman as encouraged by the guru and touches her breasts.
From this action the nectar stream of the bodhicitta fluid descends from the crown to the sixteen petals of the forehead cakra. The resulting bliss divides into the joys of body, speech, mind, and gnosis. This is applied to emptiness to create the gnosis of bliss and emptiness. In the secret initiation the disciple’s vajra slightly penetrates the secret place of the wisdom woman he has embraced and whose breasts he has touched. This causes the bodhicitta to descend from the thirty-two petals of the throat cakra to the eight petals of the heart cakra. The resultant bliss divides into the supreme joys of body, speech, mind, and gnosis, which is applied to emptiness to create the gnosis of bliss and emptiness.
In the wisdom-knowledge initiation the vajra enters the secret place of the wisdom woman. From its vigorous movement bodhicitta moves down from the sixty-four petals of the navel cakra to the thirty-two petals of the secret-place cakra. The very clear semen is liquid and moves to the opening of the vajra jewel. The resulting bliss divides into the special joys of body, speech, mind, and gnosis, which is applied to emptiness to create the gnosis of bliss and emptiness. This is one way of describing the first three higher-than-high initiations. A Short Teaching on Initiations states:
By touching the breasts of wisdom comes the bliss of moving bodhicitta.
Initiation is by the breasts,127
from its bliss it is conferred. This is the child.
From moving to the secret place,
the bliss of moving bodhicitta
and the initiation of the secret.
From its bliss is it conferred. This is the youth.
From moving to the secret place,
the moving bliss at the vajra tip,
the initiation of wisdom-knowledge,
from which comes movement and travel. This is the adult.128
I have presented above the meaning of these lines according to the venerable Nāropa’s commentary, which says:
The “wisdom” is a woman from the age of twelve to twenty.
By conferring initiation she is the giver of the mind’s joy. By touching her breasts, “comes the bliss of moving bodhicitta.” This means that the stream of molten nectar moves from the four petals of the crown lotus to the sixteen petals of the forehead lotus. This produces the experience of bliss whose nature is bodily joy, the joy of speech, the joy of the mind, and the joy of gnosis. This is the child.
Initiation is bestowed by the breasts of the yoginī. This is the first initiation and so is known as the child. Then the vajra slightly penetrates her secret place to produce “the bliss of moving bodhicitta.” This means that it moves from the throat lotus of thirty-two petals to the center of the heart lotus of eight petals to create the experience of bliss whose nature is supreme bodily joy, supreme joy of speech, supreme joy of the mind, and supreme joy of gnosis. This, because it is higher than the previous joy, is known as the “youth,” and is the secret initiation.
Then vigorous motion produces “movement and travel,” which means traveling from the navel cakra of sixty-four petals to the secret cakra of thirty-two petals. The molten drops of fluid, in fifteen parts whose tips are very clear, travel to the very opening of the vajra jewel, producing the experience of bliss whose nature is the special bodily joy, special joy of speech, special joy of the mind, and special joy of gnosis. This is the “adult” and the initiation of wisdom-knowledge.129
Nevertheless to explain the secret initiation as being the supreme-joy gnosis produced from bodhicitta falling from the throat cakra to the heart cakra, the wisdom-knowledge initiation as being the special joy produced by the descent from the heart cakra to the secret cakra, and the actual wisdom-knowledge initiation as being the innate bliss applied to emptiness formed from the fluid arriving at the tip of the vajra jewel, is a good explanation130 of the lines beginning “By touching the breasts of wisdom comes the bliss of moving bodhicitta.”131
Nāropa’s explanation of these lines from the tantra is also that of the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary, whose explanation is also made on the basis of these initiations being higher-than-high initiations.
This is so because after its explanation of the higher worldly fourth initiation, this commentary, referring to these initiations, says “The ultimate is to come;
these are deluded and not ultimate.”132 The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary continues:
Here, using different language from other tantras and with a meaning that is definitive, it is taught again using the name “vase.” The changing bliss that arises from touching is the initiation of the vase.
The changing bliss arising from the vajra approaching the secret is the initiation of the secret.
When the two organs dwell together to produce the bliss of the descending fluid, this is the initiation of wisdom-knowledge.
The unchanging bliss formed by desire for the mahāmudrā is the initiation described in the line “the fourth also is likewise.” Therefore the four initiations are differentiated as “changing, changing, falling, and unchanging.”133  In this way initiation is conferred.
These are the initiations.
As reference for the above, the commentary quotes A Short Teaching on Initiations:
As spoken of in the Supreme Original Buddha, “First, the seven initiations.”134
“The initiations of the vase and the secret,” up to “Purification of body, speech, and mind.”135 Actual initiations of secret and wisdom-knowledge as described here are not suitable for the ordained. With this in mind the glorious Atiśa says in his Light on the Path:
Because it is forcefully forbidden in the great tantra of the Original Buddha,
the secret and wisdom-knowledge initiation
should not be taken by those of brahma conduct.136
If such initiations are taken
within the asceticism of the brahmacarya,
it becomes forbidden conduct.
The vows of asceticism will weaken,
becoming a downfall for those of disciplined behavior,
they fall certainly to lower realms,
with never a chance of attainment.137
By merely experiencing the secret substances of the secret initiation, the downfall mentioned in the line “becoming a downfall for those of disciplined behavior” will not occur.
Furthermore the vase initiation consists of bliss arising from embracing the nine mudrās and from touching the breasts, which is then applied to emptiness to produce the gnosis of bliss and emptiness. The secret initiation consists of the guru sitting in sexual union with the nine mudrās, whose ages range from twelve to twenty, and sucking the naranāsika,138 or lower tip of the wisdom woman’s central channel. The vajra containing the elemental bodhicitta drops is placed in the mouth of the disciple, whose mindstream of practice has been purified. The bodhicitta is ejected, and the bliss arising from the experience of the ejected bodhicitta is applied to emptiness, producing bliss-and-emptiness gnosis. The wisdom-knowledge initiation consists of first sitting in sexual union with one’s wife and then with those mudrās from among the nine twelve- to twenty-year-olds with whom one is able to perform the act of union, from the middle watch of the night for two hours until the sun rises.139  The bliss of this union is applied to emptiness to produce bliss-and-emptiness gnosis.
This explanation of the ways to confer the higher and higher-than-high initiations is made on the basis that these are actual initiations to be given to laypeople.
For fully ordained monks and other monastics, however, these initiations are to be conferred by using just the imagination to introduce them to the real significance of the initiation.
Vajradhara said again and again that the fully ordained monk is the best of mantra practitioners, and if a fully ordained or novice monk were to actually take the particular secret and wisdom-knowledge initiations as described above, they would fall from their precepts. The nonworldly fourth This is under three headings:
1.The fourth as taught in the Kālacakra
2.The fourth initiation in the hidden tantras as taught by the mahāsiddhas 3.How these two are interchangeable The fourth as taught in the Kālacakra The Great Commentary on verse 112 of the Gnosis chapter says:
Laughing, looking, holding hands, and joining together: these four kinds of initiation do not become suchness.
Here suchness is not found within the embrace. That resulting from an activity mudrā, if examined, does not become nondual gnosis.140 In this passage suchness, or the nonworldly fourth, is referred to as nondual gnosis.
The duality that becomes nondual in the term nonduality refers to emptiness and bliss, and this is explained again and again by the tantra and the commentary. Emptiness does not only refer to an emptiness of true existence but to “empty form endowed with every supreme aspect.”141 Bliss also refers to a special bliss known as great unchanging bliss.
Empty form in its aspect of father and mother in union indivisibly united with the gnosis of supreme unchanging bliss and emptiness is the fourth initiation.
This bliss has to be unchanging bliss, because the Great Commentary says on verse 114 of the Gnosis chapter: From that arises the bliss beyond sorrow, unmoving, innate, unchanging. This is the fourth.142
Concerning the emptiness also, the commentary states: The emptiness not produced by activity mudrā and wisdom mudrā is one clearly endowed with every aspect.143 This clearly talks of empty form endowed with every supreme aspect.
Furthermore, in the first summary of the Realms chapter, the Great Commentary says:
The supreme and unchanging fourth is the gnosis of the buddhas.144
This explains that “the fourth” from the line “The fourth also is likewise” refers to the supreme and unchanging bliss.
The Great Commentary continues:
That which again is likewise, was taught by the Buddha to be one’s mahāmudrā.145 This teaches that the term likewise refers to empty form endowed with every supreme aspect, and that the inseparability of empty form with unchanging bliss and emptiness is the fourth initiation.
Furthermore, in Nāropa’s Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations, he says:
The mahāmudrā is of a form arising from space. From one’s meditational experience arising from the subsequent desire for this form comes the “unmoving.” This means that emission is prevented and does not move beyond the vajra jewel. The bliss of nonemission of the moon nectar in the form of the innate bodily joy, the innate joy of speech, the innate joy of mind, and the innate joy of gnosis is the great wisdom-knowledge and is the conferring of the fourth initiation as taught by the words “The fourth also is likewise.” This is the unobstructed and nonworldly gnosis of great insight, whose taste changes the obstructed aggregates, the five spheres and so forth, into the five tathāgatas, the five goddesses, and so forth as copper is changed into gold.
This is the completed development of a sentient being and is, therefore, known as the master of sentient beings.146
The above is commentary to the verses:
From desire for the great mudrā
arises the unmoving bliss,
the initiation of the great wisdom,
from which comes the unmoving insight
known as the master of sentient beings.147 This root text and commentary explains that in the branch of recollection, “form arising from space” refers to an actual mother-and-father empty form, for the mother of which, in her form of Viśvamātā, the yogi develops desire. From his meditation experience arises the unchanging bliss of the moon-nectar bodhicitta not being emitted from the vajra jewel. This is divided into the four joys of body and so forth, and this initial unchanging bliss is the nonworldly fourth initiation.
From this explanation it can be understood that the initial attainment of the first of the 21,600 instances of bliss, from the beginning of the branch of meditative concentration, is the lower limit of the fourth initiation.
From sustained meditative development of this unchanging bliss there arises an unobstructed and nonworldly gnosis of great insight. The taste of this development completes the transformation of the five obscured aggregates, the five spheres, and so forth into sentient beings who are the nature of the five male and five female tathāgatas and so forth, as copper is changed into gold. The fourth initiation, therefore, is known as the master of sentient beings.
But is the nonworldly fourth identified solely with unchanging bliss?
It is part of the fourth initiation and therefore is called the fourth, but the complete fourth initiation is, as explained above, the gnosis of unchanging bliss and emptiness indivisibly united with the empty form endowed with every supreme aspect. This is also the thinking of Nāropa’s commentary. The previous quote continues:
A presentation of the body and the yoga of the supreme and unchanging gnosis is spoken of in the Glorious Kālacakra:
“The body is of clarity, devoid of atoms, like the sky, well completed by the signs and so forth.
The three worlds are free of obscuration, like appearances in a dream.
“Speech is completely unbroken, in languages of many, entering the hearts of others.
Mind is full of the highest bliss, unmoving, at all times embraced by the innate.”148
Having explained the “yoga of the supreme and unchanging gnosis” and the “body,” or enlightened form, to be the fourth initiation, Nāropa states that this body and this mind of bliss, together with the way they are united, are explained in the tantra.
He then quotes verse 164 of the Gnosis chapter of the Condensed Tantra beginning, “The body is of clarity.”149 These verses are saying that when the resultant body, speech, and mind of a buddha is identified, the clear empty form, obstruction-free like space, devoid of atoms, adorned with the signs and features,150 is the body of a buddha and the unchanging bliss is the mind of a buddha.
With this in mind Nāropa quotes the above verses, beginning “The body is of clarity, devoid of atoms,” to show that the “body,” which is an empty-form gnosis body indivisibly united with the mind of unchanging bliss inseparably absorbed into emptiness, is the fourth initiation. To summarize, the nonworldly fourth initiation begins from the achievement of empty form in the aspect of mother and father in embrace indivisibly united with the unchanging bliss-and-emptiness gnosis gained from the first moment of the branch of meditative concentration and continues up to the union of buddhahood. In this way every instance of unchanging bliss and emptiness indivisibly united with empty form can be posited as the fourth initiation. This is the thinking of the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries and other commentaries. The fourth initiation in the hidden tantras as explained by the mahāsiddhas
The ultimate meaning of the fourth initiation is the union at the stage of no further practice where the pure illusory body is indivisibly united with the ultimate clear-light bliss-and-emptiness gnosis. This is the seven-limbed embrace.
Vāgiśvarakīrti explains the seven limbs as follows:
The complete enjoyment body, the embrace, great bliss, of no nature, filled with compassion,
unending, and unceasing.151
These seven characteristics of the enjoyment body are: being adorned with the signs and features of enlightenment; being in the aspect of father-and-mother embrace;
a great bliss that is unsullied, vast, of the highest quality, and in existence for as long as samsara exists; not truly existing and therefore of no nature; filled with compassion because it is a great compassion that pervades all sentient beings; unending, in that its continuity is never broken;
and unceasing, because although emanated bodies are unending also, their appearance is transitory, whereas the appearance of the enjoyment body cannot possibly vanish until the destruction of space itself.
This explanation of the union at the level of no further practice as being the fourth initiation is made on the basis of the primary or highest level of fourth initiation. Other than that, indivisible unions of the pure illusory body and the actual clear light at the level of the practitioner in which the clear light of the fourth stage152 arises in the form of the pure illusory body, are also nonworldly fourth initiations. It may be that the body of the union at the level of no further practice is complete with all seven features, but how is it known that this is the fourth initiation?
This is established from Vāgiśvarakīrti’s Seven Features: Because it contains the words “like that,”
because it contains the words “also,”
because it contains the words “likewise,”
I assert the fourth to be likewise.153
In some tantras this is rendered as “The fourth also is likewise”154 and by some as “Like that, likewise the fourth also.”155 Therefore, when the fourth initiation is taught, it is done by taking the third initiation of wisdom-knowledge as an example.
In the phrase, “Like that, likewise the fourth also,” when the meanings of the individual words “like that,” “likewise,” and “also” are explained, the fourth initiation is established as possessing the seven features. Therefore “I,” Vagisvarakirti, “assert the fourth to be likewise,” meaning “as previously explained.”
This section has been a mere illustration. A more extensive explanation can be known from the Great Path of Mantra.156 How these two are interchangeable
The masters who have written on the thinking of the hidden tantras explain the fourth initiation as being the indivisibility of the pure illusory body and the actual innate bliss. The illusory body is formed from the five lights of the winds that act as the mount of the clear-light mind, while the bliss is described merely as being innate and not as unchanging bliss. In the Kālacakra the branches of withdrawal and meditative absorption produce empty forms, whose appearances continue to develop until, on the branch of recollection, an actual mother and father in embrace is created. This empty form continues to develop, and from the sixth branch of meditative concentration onward, it is produced merely within the yogi’s mind. The basis for the accomplishment of this empty form is not found in ordinary existence. Concerning the bliss, it is not sufficient for it to be merely innate, it is also explained as being “unchanging.” Therefore there are some differences in the understanding of “union” in these two systems. Never theless, in their defining of the ultimate fourth initiation as being the indivisibility of the two bodies endowed with the seven features, there is agreement.
Moreover the empty form in the aspect of the mother and father in embrace gained from the branch of meditative concentration onward can substitute for the pure illusory body in the aspect of mother and father in embrace, and the explanation of bliss-and emptiness gnosis is similar in both traditions.
However, in the explanations of those masters who have commentated on the meanings of the hidden tantras, there is no mention of the 21,600 levels of unchanging bliss, nor is there any actual presentation of the mudrā consorts that induce these levels. This is something to be investigated. Therefore the way of conferring the fourth initiation in both systems is that the meaning of the fourth initiation is communicated by words, and merely by gaining an understanding of them, the disciple is conferred with and receives the fourth initiation verbally.
Furthermore the fourth initiation is received within the mandala of ultimate bodhicitta, subtle contamination of body, speech, and mind is removed, one is blessed with the great fortune to develop the body of the three indivisible vajras, and one is empowered to meditate upon the union of the completion stage.
This has been just a brief and condensed presentation of the initiations. Sādhana:
Methods of Accomplishment The Two Stages
Stages of generation and completion and the results of their practice This section is under three headings:
1.Ascertaining the two stages and their correct order
2.Presentations of each stage 3.A presentation of the results of practice Ascertaining the two stages and their correct order This has two outlines:
1.Ascertaining the two stages
2.Ascertaining the correct order Ascertaining the two stages In the glorious Kālacakra the special path to be developed is ascertained as consisting of the two stages of generation and completion. This is because those who are made into suitable vessels by the Kālacakra initiation for meditation on the paths are of two types.
One type of person will aim only for the lower and middling worldly siddhis, and one type will strive for the highest siddhi of unsurpassed enlightenment.
The path of practice for the first type of practitioner is ascertained to be the generation stage.
For the second type, the generation stage is ascertained as being the path that ripens the practitioner for completion-stage practice.
Once the mindstream has been ripened, the completion stage is ascertained as being the main cause for the attainment of the highest siddhi. Ascertaining the correct order In his Five Stages, composed upon the Guhyasamāja Tantra, the master Nāgārjuna said:
Dwelling well within the stage of generation,
wishing for the stage of completion,
this method, the Buddha has said,
is like the steps of a ladder.1 Therefore, assuming that one is traveling by the highest path of mantra from its very beginning, there is a definite order in which one first completes the generation stage, from which will arise a full completion stage.
This is a definite sequence, because without ripening one’s continuum with the generation stage in order to remove the coarse outer and inner faults, a full completion stage, which brings about cessations beginning from subtle outer and inner faults, will not arise. Particularly at the time of the completion stage, various empty forms appear, and in order to transform them into empty forms in the aspect of father and mother in embrace adorned with the signs and features, one must have first completed a generation stage with attributes, which involves seeing and coming into contact with deities with their particular forms, numbers of hands, and faces.
Some say that even on the basis of traveling by the highest path of mantra from its very beginning, it is not the case that the generation stage necessarily precedes the completion stage.
If it were the case that when traveling by the highest path of mantra from its very beginning, the generation stage had necessarily to precede the completion stage, then to reach enlightenment by the highest path of mantra, generation-stage meditation would definitely have to precede the completion stage.
However, they say, this is not the case, because the completion of the generation stage only ensures the attainment of worldly siddhis and is not a cause for the great siddhi of enlightenment.
This is so, they say, because the first summary from the Realms chapter of the Great Commentary says: By meditating on the mandalas with thoughts of form and so forth,
one will attain worldly siddhis,
but where is the great desired siddhi?2
This is true, but this quote does not prove that when one enters the highest path of mantra from the beginning of its practice, it is not necessary to meditate on the generation stage in order to attain enlightenment.
These words from the commentary merely teach that fulfillment of the generation stage alone will result only in the accomplishment of worldly siddhis and not in the achievement of the highest siddhi.
To this the others reply, if that is so, then it follows that having entered the highest path of mantra from its beginning, the attainment of enlightenment is not possible by the completion stage alone without the prerequisite of the generation stage, because to attain enlightenment having entered the highest path of mantra from the beginning, the meditations of the generation stage are a necessary prerequisite.
However it is not possible, they continue, for you to agree with this, because in the first summary from the Realms chapter of the Great Commentary it says:
The yoga of the completion stage,
freed from the concepts of hūḥ, phaṭ, and others,
as spoken of in the generation stage, is the method for accomplishment. There is no other.3 Therefore, they ask, does this not mean that the yoga of the completion stage, devoid of the thoughts of the conceptual meditation upon deities and of the speech of hūḥ, phaṭ, and so forth spoken of during the generation stage, is the one and only method of attaining the final goal?
In reply to this, it can be said that if your explanation represents the meaning of the above passage, then you must accept the serious consequence that there is no other cause of enlightenment than the completion stage.
Those who speak such things maintain that the generation stage is not a cause of the highest siddhi. This is refuted in Illumination of Reality, where it states that such a position is in direct contradiction to the sequence of the five chapters of the Kālacakra. So what do these words from the commentary mean?
The verse preceding the one beginning “The yoga of the completion stage” runs:
The path of various concepts
lacks the path of the sixteen and the four
and will not arrive at the suchness spoken of by the Tathāgata.4 “The suchness spoken of by the Tathāgata” refers to the highest siddhi, and such a goal will not be reached by the generation stage alone, for it is a “path of various concepts” of hands, faces, and so forth of the deities, and it lacks the divisions of the sixteen aspects and the four joys. So what is the primary cause of the accomplishment of the highest siddhi that cannot be attained by a path lacking the sixteen aspects and so forth?
The main cause is “the yoga of the completion stage” of the six-branched yoga, divorced from spoken words such as hūḥ and phat and from the conceptual meditations taught in the generation stage.
This is because the primary method for the accomplishment of the highest siddhi is the completion stage, and “there is no other.”
Therefore the generation stage ripens the mind for the creation of a full and complete completion stage. In this way the generation stage is a cause of buddhahood, and this is the thinking of the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries.
The Great Commentary states on the forty-eighth verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter: In this way, to lead the foolish and to purify their minds, lord of men, Sucandra, teach the methods of accomplishment.
Ultimately phenomena that are of “the essence of permanence or impermanence are not to be practiced here.” Therefore, for the accomplishment of buddhahood, “the methods to be practiced” are ascertained.
Here those practices that are conceptually created methods of accomplishment are “false.” This is for all Vajradhara methods of accomplishment.5 The phrase “In this way, to lead the foolish and to purify their minds” refers to the practice of the generation stage as a cause of purifying the mind. The phrase “for the accomplishment of buddhahood” refers to the practices of a conceptually created method of accomplishment,6 or generation stage, as causes of buddhahood, and these practices are necessary as ripening agents for the creation of the completion stage.
Moreover the second chapter of the second part of the Hevajra Root Tantra says: Floating like gourds upon the ocean,
amid phenomena vast as space,
how do sentient beings reach attainment
through the forms of desired deities?
This question, asked by Vajragarbha, is answered:
The Conqueror said,
“Either by the yoga of no-self
or by effort in glorious Heruka,
wishing for siddhis, do not remain with other minds, even for an instant.”7
Regarding this verse, the Vajragarbha Commentary says:
Vajragarbha, it is like this. Furthermore the yogi who dwells in the beginning stages has been led into the mandala as previously taught. This is the time for the pride of deity generation. When that has been accomplished, the yogi dwells in the yoga of no-self,8 where he will without doubt become Hevajra.
Therefore those who wish for siddhis should rely only upon the two stages and should not remain with other minds even for an instant.9
In the beginning stages, the yogi first dwells in the apprehension of shape and color.
“When that has been accomplished” or completed, “the yogi dwells in” or practices “the yoga of no-self.” These words teach that when the generation stage of the pride of deity generation has been accomplished or completed, the yogi dwells in the completion stage of no-self yoga, “where he will without doubt become Hevajra.” Therefore those who wish for the supreme siddhi of becoming Hevajra should practice only the two stages  “and not remain with other minds even for an instant.”
Concerning the way to practice the generation stage, the commentary says:
The beginner first dwells with the apprehension of the generation-stage practices of deity shape and color.
When the generation stage has been accomplished or completed, he practices the completion stage of no-self yoga.
These words teach the generation stage as a ripening agent for the creation of a fully endowed completion stage, thereby clearly illustrating the order of these two stages.
Immediately following the above passage, the Vajragarbha Commentary continues:
From that the fortunate one completes the yoga of generation and develops the withdrawal process of the first of the six branches of perfect wisdom, known as withdrawal. From this will arise the signs.10 This passage explains that the fortunate meditator completes the generation stage and practices the branch of withdrawal, the first yoga of the six-branched yoga, from which will arise the signs of smoke and so forth. Therefore this passage also clearly lays out the order of the generation and completion stages.
These teachings on the order of the two stages are mainly given on the basis of someone who enters the highest path of tantra right from its beginning.
A practitioner who has become a “last-existence,” tenth-level bodhisattva by the path of sutra and then enters tantra does not need to travel through the generation stage before embarking on the completion stage for enlightenment. Such examples are exceptions.
It may be asked if a “last-existence,” tenth-level bodhisattva has to enter the highest path of tantra in order to reach buddhahood, is enlightenment through the sutra path alone not possible?
Such a thought is not only the opinion of the Guhyasamāja and others but also of the Kālacakra and its commentaries.
The Great Commentary in the sixth summary of the Realms chapter says :
Therefore those who do not know the Supreme Original Buddha do not know the Saṃgīti.11 Those not knowing the Saṃgīti will not know the gnosis body of Vajradhara.
Those who do not know the gnosis body of Vajradhara do know the Vajra Vehicle.
All those not knowing the Vajra Vehicle are of samsara, bereft of the path of the conqueror Vajradhara.12 The Generation Stage Presentations of each stage This is under two main outlines:
1.Generation stage
2.Completion stage
Generation stage This has four headings: 1.The place of meditation 2.The meditator
3.The purpose of the meditation
4.The way to meditate The place of meditation The third verse of the Methods for Accomplishment chapter from the Condensed Tantra says:
In pleasant groves, on mountains, in places of the great Conqueror, in empty temples, in the places of great practitioners,
in cemeteries, by lakes and places of beauty, and in places hidden away,
wherever the mind is content, there one should practice, great king.
With soft bedding, there on a seat, one first recites the protection.13 This passage mentions places for the practice of the generation stage.
These include pleasant groves for the feats of gaining power and of summoning;
mountains for the feats of stupefying, paralyzing, and stabbing;
shrines blessed by the Conqueror for the eight siddhis; empty temples and the sides of the ocean for the feats of expelling and separating; the places of great practitioners for the siddhis of activity mudrā consorts;
cemeteries for the secret practices; by lakes and places of beauty, meaning rich and expansive, for the two siddhis of peace and increase; and hidden places, meaning caves or mud huts, for the feat of ruling over the three worlds.
These places are mentioned on the basis of being conducive to the attainment of tantric powers.14 These places all have common requirements, which are mentioned in a verse from the Great Commentary:
A place of dharma,
where inhabitants live in peace,
a place free of strife,
there the yogi practices.15 In such a place, seated on soft bedding, one should practice the yoga of the generation stage, which will be explained later. The meditator
The meditator should be one who has received the seven childhood initiations, as previously explained and who abides by the vows and samaya pledges. The purpose of the meditation
The common disciples of the Kālacakra meditate in order to attain the worldly siddhis, such as those of peace and increase, as well as the eight great siddhi.
The primary disciples of the Kālacakra meditate in order to attain the highest siddhi of enlightenment by suppressing the coarse impurity of the inner and outer bases of purification with generation-stage practices and by regarding this stage as a ripening agent for the creation of a fully endowed completion stage, which has the power of complete and total purification. The way to meditate
“One first recites the protection.” As this line says, the yogi performs a preliminary meditation on the protection wheel, as taught in the Realms chapter, then engages in practices that begin from the merit-field visualization as taught in the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, and finishes with the final requests at the end of the session.
The main features of Mantra Vehicle that distinguish it from the Sutra Vehicle are the practices of the five perfections,16 whose aspects are replicated and meditated upon, from the time of practice onward, to produce similar-type causes of an enlightened form body. These five, which will be present at the final result of practice, are one’s environment as a celestial palace, one’s body as a form adorned with the signs and features of enlightenment, one’s enjoyments as undefiled bliss, one’s entourage as buddhas and bodhisattvas in the forms of gods and goddesses, and one’s deeds and actions performed by light rays emitting from one’s body to bring all sentient beings to buddhahood.
This “path of the result” is present in all four classes of tantra, but deity yoga correlating to the birth and destruction bases of purification within samsara together with a generation stage that becomes a ripening process for the creation of a completion stage is only found in highest yoga tantra. Therefore the generation stage discussed here must be one endowed with these two characteristics.
This tantra talks of the correlation of the Inner, Outer, and Other, as well as giving a very extensive presentation of deity yoga. The main reason for this is that the Inner and Outer are the bases of purification while the Other is the purifier.
By meditating on the Other in its aspect of the generation stage and correlating it to inner and outer bases of purification, one’s mindstream is ripened, and by accomplishing and completing the meditations on the Other in its aspect of the completion stage, every imprint that arises in the form of the impure appearances of the Outer and Inner is removed, and the yogi becomes the Other, or resultant Kālacakra, whose nature is the four bodies. Furthermore the more extensive a presentation of deity yoga, the more fruitful will be the purification of the Outer and Inner, and the more fruitful will be the development of a generation stage as a ripening agent for the creation of a completion stage. It is with this in mind that the deity yoga of the generation stage in this tantra is so extensive. If that were not the case, then what other reason would there be for such an extensive presentation of the deities and mandalas? The way that such a generation stage simulates the processes of birth and destruction within samsara is as follows.
The primary disciples of highest mantra in general and the primary disciples of this tantra specifically, are those of the highest intelligence who, as human beings of this world of Jambudvīpa, are endowed with the six elements and possess a form for the attainment of enlightenment within one life by the practices of the generation stage and the six-branched yoga of the completion stage, the main topics of this tantra. This is stated very clearly in the tantra and in the Great Commentary. Therefore, when determining the Inner, one is primarily determining the birth and death of a womb-born human being of this world. Similarly the generation stage is a meditation simulating the processes of birth and destruction of such a human being. Therefore the way of meditating upon the generation stage is under two main headings:
1.Gathering the two kinds of accumulations, which correlates with the death process that occurs at the end of gathering of merit
2.The yoga of four branches, correlating with the after-death process of linking up to a new birth and taking a body The Two Accumulations Gathering the two kinds of accumulations, which correlates with the death process that occurs at the end of gathering of merit
This is under two outlines:
1.Accumulation of merit from the merit field, which correlates with the gathering of karma before one dies 2.Accumulation of wisdom by meditating upon the four gateways to freedom, correlating with death Accumulation of merit from the merit field, which correlates with the gathering of karma before one dies This is the practice of merit accumulation, which acts as a conducive circumstance for determining the quality of the creation of a generation-stage yoga. The merit field of the Kālacakra mandalas and deities are invited, and the seven-limbed practice and other rites as taught in the commentaries are performed.
This correlates with the gathering of good karma as a cause for birth in the future life. Accumulation of wisdom by meditating upon the four gateways to freedom, correlating with death This practice, which correlates with death, is the accumulation of wisdom by meditating upon the four gateways to freedom.
The meditations upon the four gateways to freedom are deity yoga meditations involving the dependent deities and supporting mandalas, which will be explained later, arising as the play of meditative concentration of bliss and emptiness.
This is a meditation that correlates with the death process for a human endowed with the six elements.
The death process of a human endowed with the six elements is the actual object of correlation and is described in the Great Commentary:
At the time of death of those born from a womb in this human world, water weakens fire.17 And further:
Then, because of there being no fire, earth loses its solidity and dissolves like salt to become liquid, dwelling within the water element.
Then the element of air dries up every drop of water and disappears into space.
Like this the elements quickly weaken. Then “the mind is the fire at the end of darkness,”18 which means that the foundation consciousness is placed in the realm of space, in fully aspected forms empty of all objects, dwelling in the middle.19
These quotes are referring to the dying process in which first the water element of the body weakens the fire element.
Then water dissolves earth, air dries up water, and air itself disappears. “The mind is the fire at the end of darkness” refers to the end of the process of near-attainment,20 when a clear light in its state of clear vacuity arises, and in which various aspected empty forms appear.
This is death clear light and is an object of correlation with the above meditation. This explanation differs from the explanation given by the Guhyasamāja tradition of Nāgārjuna and his disciples on the order of dissolution and on the objects appearing within the death clear light. Such a difference must be attributed to a difference in the stages of the death process of the primary disciples of the tantras.
This has already been dealt with in the Inner chapter.
The meditations of the four gateways to freedom correlating with this death process are taught in the Great Commentary, beginning, “Therefore, through the power of this meditative concentration, the process of fire is weakened by water, and this is the meditator’s21 first practice within the body.” As quoted above, the passage continues from “Then because of there being no fire” up to “empty of all objects.” Therefore, in the vacuity that is the indivisibility of the great-bliss gnosis and the emptiness of the four gateways, an empty form like an image in a prognostic mirror is to be visualized.
The necessity of visualizing this empty form in the aspect of an image in a prognostic mirror can be found in the line “the foundation consciousness is placed in the realm of space, in fully aspected forms empty of all objects, dwelling in the middle.” This means a fully aspected empty form devoid of all objects of materiality is visualized as indivisible from the four-gateway emptiness “dwelling in the middle,” meaning divorced from the extremes of existence and nonexistence, and this visualization is a meditative equipoise in conjunction with the death clear light and goes under the name foundation consciousness.
If those words of the Great Commentary meant that the gnosis indivisible from the emptiness of the four gateways to freedom was itself to be visualized in the aspect of empty form, it would follow that this meditation could not become a path that takes on the aspect of the dharmakāya, and neither could it be a means for the practice of accumulating wisdom.
But doesn’t this contradict the two phrases “meditate upon them as empty forms beyond the reality of matter” and “in the realm of space, in fully aspected forms”?
They do not because of the following reason.
“Form” in Sanskrit is rūpa, which has the meaning of both “form” and “nature.” Here it should have been translated as “nature.” “Form” is a mistranslation. This is a query and resolution that has been spoken of before.22 It should be discussed a little.
It is perfectly acceptable to translate rūpa in this way,23 but that meaning is not to be applied to the phrases “devoid of all aspects” and “emptiness beyond the nature of matter,” when used many times as synonyms of empty form in other places. Therefore, in the Shong and other translations, rūpa is often translated as “form.”24
However it is not contradictory here to also practice taking on the aspects of the dharmakāya, and so forth, because the teaching here on meditations of the four gateways to freedom must teach a correlation with the basic death process of a womb-born human as well as with the resultant dharmakāya.
The former has been explained. Correlation with the latter is that unchanging bliss in the aspect of a prognostic-mirror–image empty form, and indivisible from the emptiness in which not even an atom of existence exists from in its own side, is the ultimate gnosis of the dharma-kāya. On this subject of correlation the Great Commentary says:
The three realms of animate and inanimate are to be examined with this verse:
“There is no meditation upon no phenomena… ”25 This and the remaining lines of the verse mean that all phenomena, comprising the three realms of animate sentient beings and the inanimate world, are examined using ultimate reasoning, which determines that phenomena, although functioning under the process of cause and effect, have no nature. This is expressed as the four gateways to freedom — namely, being empty, without attributes, without aspiration, without engagement — and is single-pointedly concentrated upon. From within this state great bliss arises, and while this bliss is perceiving emptiness, one meditates on various visualized prognostic-mirror–like empty forms. The Body Vajra
The yoga of four branches, correlating with the after-death process of linking up to a new birth and taking a body This is under four headings: 1.The branch of body-vajra approximation:
A meditation on the sovereign mandala, correlating with body formation inside the womb 2.The branch of speech-vajra near accomplishment: A meditation on the sovereign activities, correlating with birth and the activities of the faculties 3.The branch of mind-vajra accomplishment: A meditation on drop yoga, correlating with the expansion of the drop
4.The branch of gnosis-vajra great accomplishment: A meditation on the yoga of the subtle, correlating with the completion of bliss at the age of sixteen The branch of body-vajra approximation: A meditation on the sovereign mandala, correlating with body formation inside the womb This has two main outlines:
1.How the generation of the celestial mansion correlates with the ordinary base 2.How the generation of the dependent deities correlates with the ordinary base How the generation of the celestial mansion correlates with the ordinary base
This is under three headings:
1.Correlation with the outside world, the place where one is to be born
2.Correlation with the mother’s body where womb conception takes place 3.Correlation with the practitioner’s body
Correlation with the outside world, the place where one is to be born The limitless-space source triangle26 that is produced when creating the seat of the mandala correlates with the space of the air mandala.
The meditation on the stacking of the mandalas of air and so forth within the source triangle correlates with the four mandalas from air up to earth.
The meditation on Meru as mentioned in the line “Upon the earth mandala, Meru, the nature of the vajra” correlates with the external Meru.
The meditation on a variegated lotus upon Meru correlates with the center of Meru.
The meditation on the sun, moon, and Rāhu in the center of the lotus correlates with the sun, moon, and Rāhu gathering externally at the end of the day of the empty sky.27 All phenomena from the source triangle up to Rāhu are visualized as blending into one and meditated upon as the seed syllables haṃ kṣa ma la wa ra ya. Although the objects of both outer and inner correlation of this stacked meditative arrangement are separate from each other, this blending into one is to show that the one gnosis of Kālacakra manifests as the stacked arrangements of the foundation below the celestial mansion. Again the letters of the syllables haṃ kṣa ma la wa ra ya individually produce space, air, fire, water, earth, Meru, lotus, moon, sun, and Rāhu,28 on top of whose completed forms is the vajra tent.
Inside the vajra tent are the complete mandalas of body, speech, and mind. These preceding and succeeding meditations on space, air, fire, water, earth, Meru, lotus, moon, sun, and Rāhu are taught by the Great Commentary. On the first meditation it says:
The features to be created inside and out are limitless space and the three-cornered wisdom source.29
On the second meditation it says:
Meditate upon the seed letters haṃ kṣa ma la wa ra ya. From them visualize that the world is produced. This is the external.
The inner as previously taught is the mother’s body.30 When this meditation on the celestial mansion resting upon lotus, moon, sun, and Rāhu on top of Meru is applied to its outer correlation, it may be drawn or meditated upon as a thousand cubits or just one cubit square. However it is still ascertained as being a four-cubit mansion of the mandalas themselves.
The mandalas or celestial mansion of complete body, speech, and mind mandalas to be meditated upon can be visualized as being of any size, but they still represent a four-cubit mandala system of the celestial mansion. The body mandala, therefore, is four cubits square. This correlates with the outer air mandala, which has a diameter of 400,000 yojana.
The speech mandala, which is half the size of the body mandala at two cubits, correlates with the water mandala, which has a diameter of 200,000 yojana from rim to rim.
The mind mandala, which at one cubit square is half the size of the speech mandala, correlates with the 100,00 yojana of the earth mandala’s diameter.
The wheel of great bliss is twelve fingerwidths and half the size of the mind mandala, correlating with the 50,000-yojana diameter of the summit of Meru.
The six-fingerwidth diameter of the lotus seat of the main deities is half the diameter of the wheel of great bliss and correlates with the 25,000-yojana diameter of the center of Meru.31 The stacked arrangement of the moon, sun, and Rāhu upon the lotus, forming the seat of the main deities, correlates with the moon, sun, and Rāhu stacked at the end of the day of the empty sky.
Correlation with the mother’s body where womb conception takes place The two meditations explained above, involving the phenomena of the source triangle of limitless space up to Rāhu, correlate simultaneously with phenomena within the mother’s body. The visualized source triangle correlates with the triangular source of the mother’s secret area, the womb where one takes birth.
The visualized air mandala correlates with the area between her crown and forehead.
The visualized fire mandala correlates with the area from the forehead to the throat.
The visualized water mandala correlates with the area between the throat and the heart. The visualized earth mandala correlates with the area from the heart to the navel. Meru visualized on top of the earth mandala correlates with the area from the mother’s navel to the secret area. The lotus visualized on Meru correlates with the lotus of the secret place.
The moon, sun, and Rāhu visualized within the lotus correlate with the three channels carrying excrement, urine, and fluid that come together at the center of her secret-place cakra.
The vajra pavilion visualized above the lotus, moon, sun, and Rāhu correlates with the vajra of the father entering the lotus of the mother.
The celestial mansion visualized there correlates with the womb in which one is to be reborn.
At the center of the complete and fully endowed celestial mansion on the lotus, moon, sun, and Rāhu or Kālāgni seat is a moon mandala marked with the thirty-two vowels correlating with the father’s fluid at conception. The sun mandala visualized beneath the moon and marked with the eighty consonants correlates with the mother’s blood at conception.
The meditation on the syllable hūḥ resting in the center of the moon, like the sign of a rabbit, from which arises a vajra marked by the syllable hūḥ, correlates with the bardo consciousness entering the blood and fluid.
The syllable hi visualized at the same time correlates with the wind acting as the mount of the bardo consciousness. The meditation involving the vowels, consonants, moon, sun, vajra, merging together as one into the syllables hūḥ and haṃ, from which arises the complete form endowed with the syllable haṃ, correlates with the fluid, blood, consciousness, and its mount of wind blending together to produce the first signs of a body in the womb. Correlation with the practitioner’s body
The body mandala correlates with the area of the body stretching from the heart down to the secret area and from the heart up to the crown.
The speech mandala correlates with a body area ranging from the navel to the throat.
The mind mandala reaches down from the heart halfway to the navel and up halfway to the throat. Alternatively the mind mandala, speech mandala, and body mandala correlate respectively with the area from the heart out to both shoulders, the area from the heart out to the elbows, and the area from the heart to the left and right fingertips. How the generation of the dependent deities correlates with the ordinary base This has two outlines: 1.The generation of the main mother-and-father deity, the śakti, and the direction vases correlating with the first three months in the womb
2.The male and female tathāgatas and so forth correlating with the remaining period of growth in the womb The generation of the main mother-and-father deity, the śakti, and the direction vases correlating with the first three months in the womb The moon marked by the thirty-two vowels, which have the nature of the thirty-two physical signs, is the manifest enlightenment of the mirrorlike gnosis. The sun marked by the eighty consonants, which have the nature of the eighty physical marks, is the manifest enlightenment of the gnosis of equality. The vajra marked by hūḥ, arising from a hūḥ syllable upon the moon disk, is the manifest enlightenment of the gnosis of analysis.
The syllable hi, coexisting with the hūḥ, is the manifest enlightenment of the wisdom of accomplishment. The fusion of these to produce the compete form endowed with the syllable haṃ is the manifest enlightenment of the wisdom of reality. These are the five manifest enlightenments from which the main deity, the conqueror Kālacakra, is formed. That moment until the generation of the emblems is a time correlating with the first three months of development in the womb, known as the months of ignorance, volition, and consciousness. The ways that various parts of the body of the main deity correlate with outer and inner phenomena are as follows.
The single body correlates with a single inner solar day of twelve lagna32 wind movements and outwardly to a single year. The two feet of Kālacakra correlate inwardly with the two sets of six lagna wind movements and outwardly to the passing of the two sets of six months.
Three throats correlate inwardly with three sets of four lagna wind movements and outwardly with the three sets of four months in a year.
Four faces correlate inwardly with four sets of three lagna wind movements and outwardly with the four sets of three months in a year.
The six shoulders that stretch from the east to the west correlate inwardly with the six sets of two lagna wind movements and outwardly with the six sets of two months in a year.
The twelve upper arms correlate inwardly with the twelve lagna wind movements and outwardly with the twelve months of a year.
Twenty-four lower arms correlate inwardly with twenty-four half lagna wind movements and outwardly with twenty-four half months in a year.
The 360 joints of the fingers correlate internally with the 360 breaths that make up 1/60 of the 21,600 breaths of one day.
Externally they correlate with the 360 days of a year.33  There are 360 joints because each of the twenty-four hands has five fingers and each of the fingers has three joints.
By meditating upon the correlation of the parts of the Kālacakra body with inner and outer phenomena, the mind becomes ripe for the creation of a completion-stage practice that will actually render these two bases free of obscuration. The completion-stage practice produces the resultant Kālacakra body, which is meditated upon at this point of practice and whose divisions or parts are the purified aspects of the inner and outer years, months, days, and their constituent parts as mentioned above.
Therefore the feet of Kālacakra that are meditated upon at this point of practice, and that stand in a position of sport or play upon the terrified forms of Māra and Rudra, are the feet of resultant Kālacakra. One foot stands upon the four māras — the aggregates, afflictions, death, and the desire god Kāma — and the other upon the attachment, resentment, ignorance, pride, and jealousy symbolized by Rudra. The two feet symbolize the actualization of nondwelling nirvana, in which samsara and nirvana are as one. These features of the body also illustrate how the yoga of the completion stage is produced from this ripening of the mindstream.
The deity seats comprising the moon, sun, and Kālāgni illustrate the right, left, and central channels, which are areas of penetrative focusing within the completion stage.
The conch and Rudra on the Kālāgni seat illustrate the breath flowing from the left and right channels.
The right leg extended in a position of sport and standing upon the moon, sun, and Kālāgni, with its conch and Rudra, illustrates the winds of the right and left channels and the red and white bodhicitta flowing into and held in the central channel.
The winds and red and white bodhicitta held in the central channel causes the white bodhicitta to stabilize at the crown, which is symbolized by the white and bent left leg.
The red bodhicitta stabilized at the tip of the jewel is illustrated by the extended red right leg.
With the white and red bodhicitta stabilizing at the crown and the jewel, the consciousness transforms into supreme and unchanging bliss, and this is symbolized by the body of Kālacakra being blue from the top of the thighs upward. The supreme and unchanging bliss is actually induced by the yoga of recollection, where an empty form in the aspect of father-and-mother embrace arises.
This is illustrated by the conqueror Kālacakra embraced by Viśvamātā in father-and-mother union.
From the perfection of these completion-stage yogas comes the resultant Kālacakra body, and the purified phenomena, as illustrated by the different parts of this body, will be the inner and outer time divisions explained above. The male and female tathāgatas and so forth correlating with the remaining period of growth in the womb This has four points:
The male and female tathāgatas and the five wrathful guardians correlate with the increase in the womb during the fourth, or name-and-form, month of growth After the generation of the śakti goddesses, vases, and emblems, the principal deity emanates Akṣobhya and consort, which then enter the principal deity’s body. Then Vajradhātvīśvarī embraced by Vajrasattva is emanated and enters the consort Viśvamātā’s body.
Then the four male and four female tathāgatas and the five wrathful guardians are generated. This process correlates with the growth of the body within the womb during the time of the fourth month, known as name-and-form month. The generation of the male and female bodhisattvas correlates with the expansion of the womb during the fifth and sixth, or six sources and contact, months
After the five wrathful guardians have been generated, Khagarbha and the other five male bodhisattvas with consorts are generated. Sparśavajrā and the other female bodhisattvas with their consorts are also generated. This process correlates with the expansion of the body in the womb during the fifth, or six sources, month and the sixth, or contact, month. The six sources begin their development in the fifth month and are completed in the sixth.
This does not mean that a particular generation of a celestial figure correlates only with a particular development within the womb.
Vajrasattva, Akṣobhya, Amoghasiddhi, Ratnasambhava, Amitāyus, and Vairocana  correlate with and are the purifiers of the six basic aggregates of gnosis, consciousness, volition, feelings, recognition, and form, respectively, and from the purified six aggregates will arise these six male tathāgatas.
Similarly Prajñāpāramitā, Vajradhātvīśvarī, Tārā, Pāṇḍarā, Māmakī, and Locanā correlate with and are the purifiers of the six basic elements of gnosis, space, air, fire, water, and earth respectively. From the six purified elements will arise the six female tathāgatas.
The five wrathful guardians correlate with and are purifiers of the five basic faculties, and the five wrathful guardians will arise from the purified faculties.
Vajrapāṇi, Khagarbha, Kṣitigarbha, Lokeśvara, Sarvanivaraṇaviṣkambhī, and Samantabhadra correlate with and are purifiers of the six basic sense faculties, or inner sources, of ear, nose, eye, tongue, body, and mind. From the six purified inner sources of consciousness arise these six male bodhisattvas.
Similarly Śabdavajrā, Sparśavajrā, Rasavajrā, Rūpavajrā, Gandhavajrā, and Dharmadhātuvajrā correlate with and purify the six basic outer sources of sound, tangibles, taste, form, smell, and mental phenomena. From the six purified outer sources will come the above six female bodhisattvas. The generation of the speech-mandala yoginīs correlates with the growth in the womb during the seventh, or feeling, month After the figures of the mind mandala have been generated, the seventy-two yoginīs of the speech mandala, such as Carcikā and so forth, are generated.
This process correlates with the growth in the womb seven months after conception during the feelings month.
Furthermore the seventy-two goddesses of the speech mandala correlate with the sixty-four channel petals of the navel channel plus the eight channel petals on the second rim of the throat cakra, which have split off and doubled from the first four petals of that cakra. These seventy-two channel petals and seventy-two goddesses are phenomena to be purified and purifiers respectively. From the purified channel petals come the seventy-two goddesses. This correlation is due to the speech mandala itself correlating with the square area formed between the throat and the navel. The generation of the 360 lunar-day deities correlates with growth in the womb during the eighth, or grasping, month
After the emanation of the speech-mandala yoginīs, the 360 deities of the lunar days are generated within the body mandala. They correlate with the growth of the body within the womb during the period of the eighth month after conception. These 360 deities of the days also correlate with the channels of the action-faculty cakras, as opposed to the activity wheels, found within the hands and feet. On each of the twelve major limb joints, there are thirty channels.
Of these, twenty-eight channels correlate with the twenty-eight entourage deities of the days.
The two remaining channel petals correlate with the main deities in father-and-mother aspect in the center of the lotus.
The 360 deities also correlate with the 360 lunar days34 of an external year. The inner and outer phenomena of the channels and lunar days are the basic phenomena to be purified. The deities of the lunar days are the purifiers. From the purified outer and inner lunar days and from the purified channels come the 360 deities of the days.
The major joints of arm and leg comprise one joint between shoulder and upper arm, one between upper and lower arm, and one between lower arm and hand, making six joints on the arms. On the legs there is a joint between the hip and the thigh, between the thigh and the lower leg, and between the lower leg and the foot, making six joints on the legs. These twelve major joints are known as action-faculty cakras. The reason is that these major joints are action faculties that initiate activities.
Similarly the sixty joints of the twenty digits of hands and feet are known as activity cakras, because the joints of hands and feet engage in the activities of taking, going, and so forth.
Each of twenty digits of the hands and legs has three joints, and each joint has six channels, to make a total of 360.
These channels correlate with the deities of the days and are the basic phenomena to be purified by them.
The deities of the lunar days are the purified channels. The correlation between purifier and phenomena to be purified can be broken down in more detail. The thirty deities of the lunar month Caitra correlate with the thirty channels of the cakra on the joint between the left upper arm and lower arm. The five joints from the middle joint of the little finger of the left hand to the middle joint of the left thumb each contain six channels, and the thirty deities of Caitra also correlate with these thirty channels.
There is a similar correlation between the lunar-day deities of the month of Vaiśākha and the thirty channels of the cakra between the right lower arm and right hand, as well as the thirty channels comprising the six channels on each of the joints from the upper joint of the right thumb to the upper joint of the right little finger.
The lunar-day deities of the month of Jyeṣṭha correlate with the thirty channels of the cakra on the joint between the left lower arm and the left hand, as well as with the thirty channels of the five upper joints from the left little finger to the left thumb. The lunar-day deities of the month of Aṣaḍha correlate with the thirty channels of the cakra on the joint between the right hip and right thigh, as well as with the thirty channels of the lower joints from the big toe to the little toe of the right foot. The thirty lunar-day deities of the month of Śrāvana correlate with the channels of the joint between the left thigh and left hip, as well as with the channels of the lower joints running from the little toe to the big toe of the left foot.
The lunar-day deities of the month of Bhādra correlate with the channels of the joint between the thigh and the calf of the right leg, as well as with the thirty channels of the middle toe joints that run from the big toe to the little toe of the right foot.
The lunar deities of the month of Aśvinī correlate with the channels of the joint between the thigh and the calf of the left leg, and with the channels that run across the left foot from the middle joint of the little toe to the middle joint of the big toe.
The lunar-day deities of the month of Kārttikā correlate with the channels of the joint between the calf and foot of the right leg, and with the channels of the upper joints of the toes of the right foot from the big toe to the little.
The lunar-day deities of the month of Mṛigaśira correlate with the channels of the joint that lies between the calf and the foot of the left leg, and with those that run across the left foot from the upper joint of the little toe to the upper joint of the big toe.
The lunar-day deities of Puṣya correlate with the channels of the joint between the right shoulder and right upper arm, and with those of the lower joints that stretch from the thumb to the little finger of the right hand.
The lunar-day deities of Maghā correlate with the channels of the joint between the left shoulder and left upper arm, and with the channels of the bottom joints of the fingers of the left hand running from the little finger to the thumb.
The lunar-day deities of Phālguna correlate with the channels of the joint between the right upper and lower arm, and with the channels of the middle finger joints that run from the thumb to the little finger of the right hand.
As explained previously, the correlation between the deities and channels above is one of purifier and phenomenon to be purified, and the above lunar-day deities are the purified forms of the channels. The following doubt can arise here.
Surely there is agreement on the channels to be purified and the lunar-day deities that purify them, as well as which deities are of which months?
However the Methods of Accomplishment chapter explains that the lunar-day deities of Caitra are created from the ca consonant group in reverse order and with short vowels embedded, and that the Vaiśākha lunar-day deities are created from the ca consonant group in forward order, and with the five long vowels and the visarga35 embedded.
This contrasts with the Great Commentary on the sixty-seventh verse of the Inner chapter, which says:
Similarly on the joint of the right lower arm are the channels of Caitra, and on the joint of the left lower arm are the channels of Vaiśākha.36 This quote, which continues with extensive explanation, says that the lunar days of Caitra are to be applied to the channels of the right upper and lower arm joint, and that the lunar days of Vaiśākha are to be applied to the channels of the joint between the left upper and lower arm.
It also states that the Caitra lunar-day seed syllables of the ca consonant group with five long vowels plus the visarga embedded are created in forward order, and that the Vaiśākha lunar-day seed syllables of the ca consonant group with five short vowels plus the anusvāra37 embedded are created in reverse order. How can these two not be contradictory?
This is a very valid doubt, and the reason why it is not contradictory will be well explained.
First of all, understand this.
The thirty zodiacal days from when the mean sun enters the house of Aries until it enters the house of Taurus are to be applied to the thirty channels of the left elbow joint. Similarly the days of Taurus are applied to the channels of the right wrist joint. The days of Gemini are applied to the channels of the left wrist joint. The days of Cancer are applied to the channels of the right hip joint. The days of Leo are applied to the channels of the left hip joint.
The days of Virgo are applied to the channels of the right knee joint.
The days of Libra are applied to the channels of the left knee joint.
The days of Scorpio are applied to the channels of the right ankle joint.
The days of Sagittarius are applied to the channels of the left ankle joint. The days of Capricorn are applied to the channels of the right shoulder joint.
The days of Aquarius are applied to the channels of the left shoulder joint.
The thirty zodiacal days of the mean sun entering the house of Pisces are applied to the thirty channels of the right elbow joint.
How that is taught in the Great Commentary can be found in its text on the sixty-seventh verse of the Inner chapter of the Condensed Tantra:
Among them, on the joint of the right shoulder and upper arm, are the thirty channels of the thirty-day division of Capricorn.38 This teaches that the thirty zodiacal days of Capricorn are to be applied to the channels of the right shoulder joint.
The Great Commentary continues on the sixty-eighth verse: The divisions of days of Maghā and the passage of Capricorn…39 Thus the house of Capricorn and Maghā are linked.
On the same verse, the Great Commentary continues:
Here Phālguna and the passage of Aquarius are the thirty channels of the faculty cakra of the joint between the left shoulder and upper arm.40
Thus the house of Aquarius and the month Phālguna are paired, and both are applied to the left shoulder joint.
Similarly the house of Pisces is paired with Caitra, Aries with Vaiśākha, Taurus with Jyeṣṭha, Gemini with Asaḍha, Cancer with Śrāvana, Leo with Bhādra, Virgo with Aśvinī, Libra with Kārttikā, Scorpio with Mṛigaśira, and Sagittarius with Puṣya.
Moreover the Great Commentary continues on the sixty-seventh verse: On the joint of the left shoulder and upper arm are the thirty channels of the thirty-day division of Phālguna.41
The text continues, “Caitra is on the right upper arm joint,” “Vaiśākha is on the joint of the left upper arm,”  “Jyeṣṭha is on the joint of the right lower arm and hand,” “Aṣaḍha is on the joint of the left lower arm and hand,” “Śrāvana is on the joint of the right hip and thigh,” “Bhādra is on the joint of the left hip and thigh,” “Aśvinī is on the joint of the right thigh and calf,” “Kārttikā is on the joint of the left thigh and calf,” “Mṛigaśira is on the joint of the right calf and foot,” and “on the joint of the left foot and calf are thirty channels of the nature of the thirty days of Puṣya.”
If the earlier and later passages from the Great Commentary on the pairing of zodiacal months and lunar months42 are compared, it can be seen that they verify the way the houses linked with the channels of the twelve major joints of the arms and legs have been explained here.
This can be taken as a basis. Lunar months are either waxing or waning-led.43 On the basis of being waning-led, the way that lunar months and zodiac months are paired is that the house of Aries is paired with Vaiśākha and so forth, as taught by the Great Commentary above.
When that occurs, the seed syllables of the zodiacal days of Aries, which comprise the ca consonant group with the five short vowels and anusvāra embedded, and which occur in reverse order, must also be explained as being the seed syllables of the lunar day deities of Vaiśākha.
Similarly, the seed syllables of the zodiacal days of Pisces, which comprise the ca consonant group with the five long vowels and visarga embedded, and which occur in forward order, must also be explained as being the syllables the lunar-day deities of Caitra. But isn’t it possible to ascertain definitive sets of seed syllables for the lunar days and zodiacal days?
There are no fixed seed syllables.
The explanations from the sixty-seventh verse of the Inner chapter describe the seed syllables of the days belonging to the period of the gradual disintegration of the channels that begins three years and three months before the timely end of a hundred-year life.
As this channel disintegration is a sign of oncoming death, it is a disintegration brought on by the elements gradually withdrawing.
The consonants disappear beginning with the ka group, and from the major joints of the arms and legs,  the channels of the right shoulder and upper arm joint are the first to die, followed by those of the left shoulder joint, those of the right elbow joint, and so on, alternating right and left as far as the channels of the left ankle.
The channels of the joints on the right arm and leg are those of wisdom.
In the process of dying, their seed-syllable consonants are therefore stacked, the consonant groups are in forward order, and the long vowels plus visarga are embedded in the consonants in reverse order.
The channels of the left arm and leg are method channels, and the consonant groups therefore are single, in reverse order, and the short vowels plus anusvāra are embedded in the consonants in forward order This can be illustrated with an example.
The stacked syllables kkāṃ, kkḷīṃ kkā, kkī, kkū, kkṛī, kkī, kkā, together with the same vowels on each the consonants kha, ga, gha, and ṅa to make thirty syllables in total, are applied to the thirty channels of the right shoulder joint.
Likewise, on the channels of the left shoulder joint are the single syllables ṅa, ṅi, ṅṛi, ṅu, ṅḷi, and ṅaṃ plus similar groups made up of the consonants gha, ga, kha, and ka, to make thirty in total.
On the channels of the right elbow joint are the long-vowel stacked consonants of the ca group.
On those of the left elbow joint are the short-vowel single syllables of the ca group.
On the channels of the right wrist joint are the long stacked ṭa group syllables.
On the channels of the left wrist joint are short single syllables of the ṭa group. On the channels of the right hip joint are the long stacked syllables of the pa group.
On those of the left hip joint are the short single pa group syllables.
On the channels of the right knee joint are the long stacked syllables of the ta group.
On those of the left knee joint are the short single ta group syllables.
On the channels of the right ankle joint are the long stacked syllables of the sa group, while on those of the left ankle joint are the short single sa group syllables.
The commentary from the sixty-seventh verse of the Inner chapter is in the context of channel dissolution at the end of a completed life44 and also in the context of the houses being applied to a waning-led month. Therefore the lunar deities of Vaiśākha are assigned to the ca group of consonants in reverse order and with short vowels and anusvāra embedded in forward order.
The lunar deities of Caitra are assigned to the ca group of consonants in forward order with long vowels and visarga embedded in reverse order.
The first channels of the action-faculty cakras to die at the end of a completed life are those of the right shoulder joint. Of the consonant groups the first is the ka group. Death is a withdrawal process, and so the consonants of the elements of earth, water, fire, air, and space are of the ka group in forward order, while the five vowels of those elements beginning with ḷī are in reverse order. Finally the visarga of the gnosis element is embedded.
When the houses are assigned to a waning-led lunar month, the syllables of the channels, house days, and lunar months are as explained above. However the explanation of the lunar-day deity emanation taught in this section of the text is different. So what is the difference?
The lunar-day deity emanation as taught in this part of the text begins with the emanation of the lunar-day deities of Caitra. They emanate in the creation order of the elements, which are in a state of inactive absorption, as space, air, fire, water, and earth, respectively. The houses also are assigned to a waxing-led month. Those are the differences.
The thirty days of the house of Aries, the thirty lunar days of a waxing-led Caitra, the thirty channels of the left upper and lower arm joint, and the thirty channels in five groups of six from the middle joint of the left little finger to the middle joint of the left thumb are those of the air element. Its syllable group, therefore, is ca.
Because this process begins with the creation of the elements, the ca group is in reverse order. Between method and wisdom it belongs to the method sphere, and its vowels — a, i, ṛi, u, ḷī, aṃ — therefore are short and in forward order.
Similarly the thirty house days of Taurus, the thirty lunar days of the waxing-led Vaiśākha, the thirty channels of the action-faculty cakra of the joint between right lower arm and hand, the thirty activity-wheel channels in five groups of six on the upper joints of the right hand running from the thumb to the little finger, are also of the air element and are assigned to the ca syllable group.
The elements on the right of the body, of the wisdom sphere, begin from the withdrawal process, and the ca consonant group, therefore, is in forward order. The vowels, plus visarga, are long and in reverse order.
From this example, therefore, one can know that the zodiacal days, the lunar days of a waxing-led month, the channels of action-faculty cakra and activity-cakra joints, and the consonant groups assigned to the left are all in reverse order, whereas those assigned to the right are in forward order.
On the consonants in reverse order, the vowels are short, while the consonants in forward order have long vowels.
Of the houses in this section, Aries is first.
Of the lunar months Caitra is first.
Of the consonant groups the ca group is first.
Of the withdrawal and creation of the elements, creation comes first. Of the vowels the short vowels come first.
Of the channels of the action faculty cakras situated at the joints, the channels of the left upper and lower arm joint are first. Of the activity-cakra channels, those spread across the middle joints of the left hand from the little finger to the thumb are first.
After this group comes Taurus and the other houses and Vaiśākha and the other lunar months.
The lunar months and zodiacal months are assigned to the consonant groups from ca to ka. On the odd numbered houses and months, the consonants are in reverse order with short vowels embedded in forward order. On the even numbered houses and months, the consonants are in forward order with long vowels embedded in reverse order. This is not difficult to understand.
Concerning the sequence of the channels for the various correlations, those of the left elbow joint are followed by those of the right wrist joint.
Then come those of the left wrist joint, followed by the right hip joint, the left hip joint, the right knee joint, the left knee joint,  the right ankle joint, the left ankle joint, the right shoulder joint, the left shoulder joint, and the right elbow joint.
When correlation is made in this order, the channels on the left, starting from those of the left shoulder joint to those of the left ankle joint, are assigned the odd-numbered houses of Aquarius, Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, and Sagittarius, respectively, as well the odd-numbered lunar months of Maghā, Caitra, Jyeṣṭha, Śrāvana, Aśvinī, and Mṛigaśira.
The consonant groups on the left run from ka to sa, are in reverse order with short vowels embedded in forward order.
The joint channels on the right run from those of the right elbow joint, down to those of the ankle and up to the channels of the right shoulder joint.
They host the even-numbered houses of Pisces, Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, and Capricorn, as well as the even-numbered lunar months of Phālguna, Vaiśākha, Aṣaḍha, Bhādra, Kārttikā, and Puṣya.
The consonant groups run from ka to sa, are in forward order with long vowels embedded in reverse order.
Also, when the lunar-day deities emanate, the order of emanation is from Caitra to Phālguna.
The lunar-day deities of the odd-numbered months emanate from their respective consonant groups, which are in reverse order with short vowels embedded in forward order.
Those of the even-numbered months emanate from their respective consonant groups, which are in forward order with long vowels embedded in reverse order.
The reasons for the above are as follows.
The left channel is the channel of seminal fluid and of the moon.
Similarly the channels of the action-faculty cakras and activity cakras on the left, the odd-numbered houses, the odd-numbered months, and the lunar-day deities of the odd-numbered months are all moon and seminal fluid phenomena.
Between method and wisdom they belong to the realm of method, and so their individual seed syllable consonant groups are in reverse order with short vowels embedded in forward order.
Also the elements correlating with these channels and other phenomena through to the lunar-day deities are in their creation order of space, air, fire, water, and earth.
In terms of the major elements, ka is space, ca is air, ṭa is fire, pa is water, ta is earth, and sa is gnosis.
In terms of the minor elements, ṅa is the space of space, gha is the air of space, ga is the fire of space, kha is the water of space, and ka is the earth of space.
Likewise the sequence runs from ña as the space of air to ca as the earth of air.
Ṇa is the space of fire, and so on, to ṭa being the earth of fire.
Ma is the space of water, continuing on to pa as the earth of water.
Na is the space of earth, continuing on to ta as the earth of earth.
Kṣa is the space of gnosis, continuing in sequence to sa as the earth of gnosis.
In terms of the major elements, the channels of the action-faculty cakras on the left elbow joint and those on the right wrist joint, the channels of the activity cakras on the middle joints of the left fingers and those on the upper joints of the right fingers, the two houses Aries and Taurus, the lunar months Caitra and Vaiśākha, and the lunar deities Rakṣā plus entourage and Vāyu plus entourage, are all of the element air.
Similarly each pairing of channels, houses, lunar months, and lunar deities, in the order explained above, correlate with the remaining elements of fire, water, earth, gnosis, and space. In terms of the minor elements, those of the sphere of method are in the minor-element creation order. Therefore the consonant groups are in reverse order, while the vowels are in the order of space, air, fire, water, earth, and gnosis, and are therefore embedded in forward order.
The houses, lunar months, and lunar-day deities applied to the channels on the right are the phenomena of blood and sun, and therefore are of the sphere of wisdom.
The arrangement of the seed syllables, the withdrawal order of the major and minor elements, and the length of the vowels, which are long because wisdom is twice that of method, can all be known by referring to the above explanations. In the Inner chapter and Realms chapter it is explained that because wisdom is twice the length of method, the consonants are also written as stacked doubles.
However, here in this section, the generation of the lunar-day deities is assigned to the bright half of the month and their growth to the dark half. Therefore the lunar days compared to the house days are of the sphere of method and are phenomena of the moon. Therefore, even when the consonants are embedded with long vowels, they are not stacked but are single. Analysis of the Colors of the Lunar-Day Deities
At this point the colors of the lunar-day deities need to be examined. This has two outlines:
1.Its presentation in the Methods of Accomplishment chapter
2.How that presentation has produced two different explanations Its presentation in the Methods of Accomplishment chapter The Great Commentary on the thirty-third verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter says:
“Outside of that, the sun lotuses,” means that outside of that are the twelve lotuses of the body mandala. To the right of the eastern gate and so forth on the walls of the fence, like Khagarbha and the others, Nairtya and so on are numbered.45 This establishes the directions and how the deities are placed on the walls of the fence. The text continues: “Asura” means Nairtya, placed to the right of the eastern gate.46 “Cala” refers to Vāyu, who is in the southeast.
Yama is to the left of the southern gate. On the right is Agni. In the southwest is ¡aṇmukha.
To the left of the western gate is Yakṣa and to the right is Śakra.47 In the northwest is Brahmā.
To the left of the northern gate is Rudra, to the right Samudra.
In the northeast is Gaṇapati. To the left of the eastern gate is Viṣṇu. All have four hands.48 This passage teaches very clearly the positions of the lunar-day deities.
The text continues with commentary on the thirty-fourth verse:
In the two right hands of each of these twelve are implements. In the first of Nairtya, a sword and a curved knife.49 And so on until: In the first of Viṣṇu a wheel, and in the second a club.
Up to this point the passage is teaching the implements in the right hands.
The text continues: Then on the left, in the first hand of Nairtya a shield, and in the second a skull.
And so on until:
In the first of Vāsudeva50 a lotus, and in the second a conch of five lives. These are, in order, the implements held in the two left hands.51 This passage teaches the symbols held in the left hands.
In the same section, the text states:
The lunar days of Caitra are on the petals of the Nairtya lotus.
And so on until:
The lunar days of Phālguna are on Yama.52 This passage explains which lunar-day deities of which month are the entourage of which of the twelve great gods.
The text continues:
The colors, implements, and forms of the goddesses are similar.53 The colors and so forth of the female deity entourage54 are those of the central deity. On the eighty-fourth verse of the Condensed Tantra, the Great Commentary says:
This teaches the seed syllables of Śakra and the others of the body mandala. The syllable tam is Śakra. And so on until:
These are the seed syllables of the lunar-day deities.55 This passage numbers the lunar-day deities as 360, gives the seed syllables from which they emanate, the names of each of the deities, which lunar-day goddess sits on which petal of the lotus, and how these deities emanating from their individual syllables correlate with particular months. How that presentation has produced two different explanations
Abhayākaragupta has the lunar-day deities of the east and southeast56 as black, those of the south and southwest red, those of the north and northeast white, and those of the west and northwest as yellow.
Specifically he says that Rudra and entourage, who are the lunar-day deities of Mṛigaśira to the left of the northern door, are white. Kubera57 and entourage, the lunar-day deities of Puṣya to the left of the western gate, are yellow. Viṣṇu and entourage, the lunar-day deities of Maghā sitting to the left of the eastern gate, are black. Yama and entourage, the lunar-day deities of Phālguna to the left of the southern gate, are red.
According to the tradition of Sherap Sengé, the great Kālacakrapāda of Rong,58 and others, these groupings of deity colors are wrong.
They refute the above presentation because in their words, the fifty-eight lunar-day deities59 of Mṛigaśira and Puṣya are of the gnosis element, are created from the sa consonant group, and are blue in color.
The fifty-eight lunar-day deities of Maghā and Phālguna are of the space element, develop from the ka consonant group, and are green.
This assertion they back up with scripture and logic. The scripture comes from the Great Commentary on the seventeenth verse of the Gnosis chapter: Now the generation of the Akṣobhya class is taught. “From the emptiness of the pure crown” means that from the pure aggregate of consciousness and the pure element of space within the crown cakra arises the great Vajradhara Akṣobhya sealed by gnosis and green in color.
Similarly Vajradhātvīśvarī, Uṣṇīṣa, Vajrahūḥkāra, Raudrākṣī, Khrodinī, Vajrapāṇi, Dharma dhātu vajrā, Viṣṇu, Yama, and the nāga Jaya, emanate from the upper face. They are of many qualities, granting siddhis of every activity, marked by the sign of the vajra, sealed by Akṣobhya, arising as green from the color of space.60 Therefore because Viṣṇu and Yama are of the major element of space, their color is “the color of space,” or green.
The passage continues:
From the purified aggregate of gnosis and the purified element of gnosis within the secret cakra arises a blue Vajrasattva marked by a three-pointed vajra sealed by consciousness. Similarly Prajñānīla, Sumbha, Vajravega, Atinīla, Khrodinī, Īśvarī, Rudra, Jambhala, Samantabhadra, Śabdavajrā, and the nāga Vijaya, all of the gnosis element, these benefactors, causes of the liberation of sentient beings, emanate from the phenomena of gnosis in the lower foundation, arising in the color blue from the dharmadhātu gnosis and sealed by Vajrasattva in the form of a blue Akṣobhya in order to accomplish every activity.61 This says that Rudra and Jambhala, or Kubera, are blue in color.
Moreover the previous passage from the Methods of Accomplishment chapter clearly lays out the twelve great deities with their number of hands, faces, hand implements, and where and in what direction of the wall they are placed.
With the words “like Khagarbha and the others, Nairtya and so on are numbered,” the colors of these twelve deities in their respective places are clearly stated as being similar to the colors of the twelve male and female bodhisattvas in their respective places in the mind mandala. Therefore the deities Viṣṇu, Yama, Rudra, and Kubera positioned on the left of the four gates are green and blue, as explained above, in the same way that the male and female bodhisattvas Vajrapāṇi, Dharmadhātuvajrā, Samanta bhadra, and Śabdavajrā in the mind mandala are also green and blue.
If that is not the meaning of the above passages, then the line “like Khagarbha and the others,” which teaches a similarity to Khagarbha and other bodhisattvas, and which is not taught elsewhere in this section, would become meaningless, because except for the colors of the lunar-day deities, all other features such as their positions in the wall being similar to those of Khagarbha and so forth are dealt with and clearly taught in this section of text. Furthermore the Great Commentary says on the forty-second verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter:
In the colored-powder mandala all the goddesses who dwell in space and below, whoever they may be, are below the portals of the east and west gates. The direction protectors and so forth are meditated upon as dwelling in the places as taught.
The four, Samantabhadra and others, on the left of the gate are similar.62 Therefore when the powder mandala is drawn,  the green and blue space-element and gnosis-element goddesses dwelling above in space and in the lower regions are all placed under the east and west portals.
To resolve a doubt as to whether the green and blue space-element and gnosis-element deities among the upper and lower direction protectors Viṣṇu, Rudra, Yama, and Kubera, and the male and female bodhisattvas Samanta-bhadra and so forth, should be visualized as being above and below like the upper and lower goddesses, the passage continues, “The direction protectors and so forth are meditated upon as dwelling in the places as taught.
The four, Samantabhadra and others, on the left of the gate are similar.” This illustrates that although Samantabhadra and so forth and Viṣṇu and so forth have been taught as being upper and lower gods, when meditating on the sādhana, one should meditate on their positions as taught in the Methods of Accomplishment chapter.
Therefore explaining Viṣṇu and the others as being upper and lower gods establishes these four as being green and blue as previously explained.
This is because the space-element upper deities of Kālacakra are green and the lower gnosis-element goddesses are blue.
The sādhana composed by Sādhuputra states:
These are in the south. Left of the east on a red garuda and lotus the letter kam and a wheel, from which arises a green Viṣṇu in embrace with Lakṣmī, who is similar to Yakṣa.63
From the letter sam and a trident arises a blue Hari with a trident, arrow, and a khaṭvāṅga64 staff.65 This text therefore states that Viṣṇu is green and Hari, or Rudra, is blue.
In the same text, where one would expect Yakṣa to be similar to Rudra, the sādhana states, “Yakṣa holds a jewel, club, mongoose, and lotus and is like Viṣṇu,” thereby explaining that Kubera, or Yakṣa, is of a color similar to Viṣṇu.
Where one would expect Yama to be similar to Viṣṇu, the text has, “Yama, similar to Hari,” thereby explaining that Yama is similar in color to Rudra. These must be misprints or mistranslation.
For example, in what should read, “From vajras and from the letter a arises Śabdavajrā, of the nature of sound, together with Vajrapāṇi,” the sādhana reads, “similar to Vajrapāṇi,”66 thereby stating that Śabdavajrā is similar to Vajrapāṇi.67
Therefore Sādhuputra also explains Viṣṇu as green and Rudra as blue, whereas in this section on the lunar-day deities, there is no mention at all of Viṣṇu as black, Rudra as white, Kubera as yellow, and Yama as red. This damages the former assertion. They may reply that it may not be mentioned in this section on the lunar-day deities but it is taught elsewhere, and so cannot we infer, in this section on lunar-day deities, that also Viṣṇu is black and so forth and that is the reason it was not taught in this particular section? In the Initiation chapter, in the section on the protection wheel, the Great Commentary says:
From gha and ghā arise Brahmā and Viṣṇu, green and blue.
Brahmā is above the fence area and Viṣṇu below.68 This describes Viṣṇu as being blue and says that Viṣṇu is placed below. Therefore this accords with the gnosis element below being blue and with the lunar deity emanating from the gnosis sa consonant series as being blue.
The Great Commentary continues:
Similarly, in the south and southwest from ḍhṛ and ḍhṛī, Yama and Agni.69 This describes Yama as being red, which agrees with your70 description of the lunar-day deity Yama and entourage as being red.
However the protection-wheel Yama, which emanates from the syllable ḍhṛī, is of the fire element and is in the south. The lunar-day Yama and entourage is produced from the ka consonant series, is of the space element, and is a deity of the upper direction. Therefore they are similar in name only. Furthermore the Great Commentary says:
In the north and northeast from bhu and bhū come Samudra and Śaṅkara71
This passage talks of a white Rudra, which agrees with your assertion of a white lunar-deity Rudra.
However the Rudra, or Śaṅkara, of the protection wheel is produced from the syllable bhū, is of the water element, and is in the north.
The lunar-day Rudra and his entourage emerges from the sa consonant group, is of the gnosis element, and is a god of the lower directions. They are, therefore, similar in name only.
The same is true of Kubera. They all arise in the colors of the element of their syllables.
Moreover Sādhuputra’s sādhana says, “From the syllable haḥ and from a club arises a red Vārāhī and a white Śaṅkara,”72 explaining that red Vārāhī is embraced by white Rudra. Similarly it is explained that white Rudrī is embraced by red Yama, and yellow Brahmāṇī is embraced by a black Hari,73 or Viṣṇu.
The white Rudra who embraces the feelings-aggregate Vārāhī is of the recognition aggregate, of the water element, and is therefore white. The Viṣṇu embracing the form-aggregate Brahmāṇī is of the volition aggregate, of the air element, and is therefore black.
The Yama who embraces the recognition-aggregate Rudrī is of the feeling aggregate, of the fire element, and is therefore red.
The Great Commentary says on the eighty-third verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter:
Vārāhī and Kaumārī are of the feeling aggregate.
Those facing them are of the recognition aggregate and arise from the letter u.
Aindrī and Brahmāṇī are goddesses of the form aggregate.
Facing them are those of the volition aggregate, who arise from the syllable e.
Rudrī and Lakṣmī are of the recognition aggregate, and those facing them are of the feeling aggregate, arising from the letter ṛ.74 Therefore, in the protection wheel, Viṣṇu is a protector of the lower directions and is therefore blue.
Likewise the Rudra and the other figures of the protection wheel and the Rudra and other deities embracing the main female deities of the speech mandala are of elemental and directional colors determined by their individual syllables and major elements. In the same way, here in this section, the lunar-day deities must necessarily be of elemental and directional colors determined by their individual syllables and major elements.
For example, in the Initiation chapter, the Great Commentary says, “Similarly, in the south and southwest from ḍhṛ
and ḍhṛī, Yama and Agni.”75 On the basis of the minor elements, the syllable dha as the root of ḍhṛ
is air, but the ṭa consonant group is predominant and determined as being of the major element of fire, thereby creating in that section a red Yama and Agni.
Similarly, the text continues, “In the north and northeast from bhu and bhū come Samudra and Śaṅkara.”76  The bha of the syllable bhu is space on the basis of the minor elements, but the pa consonant group predominates and is determined to be of the major water element, and so Samudra and Śaṅkara are posited as white.
Therefore, with the exception of the individual consorts of the main lunar-day deities, the thirty lunar deities are put in five groups. On the basis of the minor elements, the syllables of these five groups will produce varying elements.
However, on the basis of the major elements, every syllable of the twenty-nine deities is the same, and apart from the consort of each lunar-day main deity, the colors of the twenty-nine are the same.
Using Abhayākaragupta’s assertion, it is not much of a reason to say that Viṣṇu is black because when meditating on the sādhana and placing deities in the mandala he is in the east,77 for the same would have to apply to the male and female bodhisattvas placed on the left of the gates of the mind mandala also.
Therefore the main reason for his position must be that in the speech mandala there is a black Viṣṇu, a white Rudra, and a red Yama, all embracing the main female deities. Viṣṇu and the others who emanate embracing the main female deities of the speech mandala also emanate as the main deities of Phālguna and the other lunar months in the body mandala.
Therefore Viṣṇu and the others as lunar-day deities, and Viṣṇu and the others embracing the main female deities of the speech mandala, must be similar in being black and so forth.
This I think is the best reason.
Again, these two assertions are  that the colors of the lunar-day deities of Mṛigaśira, Puṣya, Maghā, and Phālguna are definitely green and blue or  that they are definitely black and so forth in accord with the colors of the directions.
Our wise gurus  maintain that either position is acceptable.
Nevertheless this is a topic to be thoroughly and honestly examined. After the emanation of the lunar-day deities,  the wrathful male and female guardians are generated to correlate with the eighth “grasping” month of pregnancy, during which the channels of the palms of the hands, the soles of the feet, the crown, and the anus are completed.
After that, the nāgas and the fierce females generated in correlation with the ninth or “taking” month of pregnancy, when the twenty finger and toe channels are completed.
The ten nāgas are the purified forms of the channels of the ten toes, and the ten ferocious females represent the purified forms of the channels of the ten fingers.
The thirty-five million elemental spirits inhabiting the far regions of the air mandala correlate with the period in the ninth month of pregnancy when hair and body hair has grown.
This generation process, up to the emanation of the thirty-five million elemental spirits, correlates with the completion of a human body endowed with the six elements after nine months in the womb. It also represents the completion of the deity generation within the body, speech, and mind mandalas of the sovereign mandala as applied to the bases of purification.
The Great Commentary, on the thirty-eighth verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, states:
Likewise the purified hair on head and body represented by the thirty-five million elemental spirits are born at the “far edges of movement,” which means at the farther reaches of the air mandala. They are generated outside because hair is known to be on the skin at the far reaches of the body. In this way the body at the end of nine months and the collection of deities is complete.78 The offering goddesses of the mind mandala and the goddesses of desire and nondesire are generated here in the sovereign mandala, and it may be wondered if they are generated as deities of the body, speech, and mind mandalas correlating to particular bases of purification.
It would appear that they are not applied to bases of purification in the same way that the terraced offering goddesses are in other mandalas, such as those of Guhyasamāja.
This is because the emanation of the thirty-five million elemental spirits represents the completion of deity manifestation applied to the duration of pregnancy, and the mind-mandala offering goddess and the desire and nondesire goddesses are not mentioned in the Great Commentary as correlating with a period of pregnancy.
Moreover, if the deities generated within the sovereign mandala are to be applied to particular bases, they must be applied to the periods of pregnancy. However the Great Commentary says on the forty-second verse:
Then, in the nature of the ten channels of the heart, on terraces to the left and right of the four doors of the mind mandala, offering goddesses emanate. In the east the goddesses of scent and of garlands.79 This passage says that ten mind-mandala offering goddesses are purified forms of the ten channels at the heart cakra.
However they cannot be correlated with the ten channels of the heart, because when the deities in the sovereign mandala are applied to various bases, each group of deities correlates with a particular month of pregnancy and to a stage of development in the womb.
The ten channels at the heart develop before the sixty-four channels at the navel and eight channels at the throat, which correlate with the speech-mandala yoginīs. These offering goddesses, on the other hand, are generated after the elementals, as is stated by the words “Then, in the nature of” above.
Therefore the sum total of deities actually described in terms of their number of faces and hands in this section on the sovereign mandala is as follows.
The main father and mother plus the eight śakti are ten.
Four male tathāgatas are embraced by four female tathāgatas, and those four females are separately embraced by four male tathāgatas to make sixteen tathāgatas.
This totals twenty-six deities.
Six male bodhisattvas are embraced by six female bodhisattvas, and those six female bodhisattvas are embraced by six male bodhisattvas, to make twenty-four bodhisattvas,80 which together with the ten father-and-mother wrathful guardians from the mind mandala makes thirty-four and brings the total to sixty.
With the ten mind-mandala offering goddesses, this makes seventy mother-and-father deity figures. This is the number of deities in the mind mandala.
In the speech mandala each of the eight main goddesses is embraced by a god, making sixteen mother-and-father deities. Each of the main goddesses has an entourage of eight goddesses, making sixty-four and bringing the total to eighty. This totals 150 deities so far. The thirty-six desire goddesses make 186 deities up to and including the speech mandala.
There are the 360 lunar-day deities and twelve body-mandala wrathful guardians comprising six father-and-mother pairs, which makes 372 and 558 in total.
There are ten nāgas in mother-and-father union and ten fierce females also in mother-and-father union.
This makes 598 deities.
The thirty-six nondesire goddesses make 634.
These are figures whose colors, numbers of hands, and faces are all clearly taught. The emanations of the thirty-five million elemental spirits are taught in a way that does not clarify the numbers of hand and faces. These are clearly described in the Methods of Accomplishment chapter in the section on the sovereign mandala.
Furthermore it is taught that there are eleven deities in each of the eight cemeteries, to make eighty-eight figures in the cemeteries. This makes a total of 722. Apart from the thirty-five million elemental spirits, these are the total number of deities in the complete body, speech, and mind mandalas of Kālacakra.
In terms of mind and body, “body” deities are generally green in the upper regions, blue in the lower regions, black in the east and southeast, red in the south and southwest, white in the north and northeast, and yellow in the west and northwest.
“Mind” deities are the reverse.
“Body” upper-region fathers embrace “mind” lower-region mothers, and “body” upper-region mothers embrace “mind” lower-region fathers.
Those of the east and southeast and those of the west and northwest are method and wisdom respectively. Likewise those of the south and southwest and those of the north and northeast are method and wisdom respectively.
Because of this, the green upper male and female deities are embraced by the blue lower female and male deities, and the blue lower male and female deities are embraced by the green upper female and male deities.
Similarly the black male and female deities of the east and southeast are embraced by the yellow female and male deities of the west and northwest. The yellow deities of the west and northwest are embraced by the black deities of the east and southeast. The red deities of the south and southwest are embraced by the white deities of the north and northeast.
The white deities of the north and northeast are embraced by the red deities of the south and southwest. This is only a general explanation.
More specifically the Great Commentary, on the seventy-fifth verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
Similarly the great one, the master, the aggregate of gnosis and Viśvamātā, the element of gnosis, are body and mind for each other.81 This means that the gnosis-aggregate Vajrasattva and the gnosis-element Viśvamātā Prajñāpāramitā are method and wisdom. The text continues, “Consciousness and the element of space,” which means that the consciousness-aggregate Akṣobhya and the space-element Vajradhātvīśvarī are method and wisdom.
Likewise the Great Commentary, on the fifty-fourth verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, states when explaining how the samaya beings and gnosis beings become of one taste:
Here, in the generation yoga, in the stages of generation, “consciousness is together with space,” meaning together with Vajradhātvīśvarī, “within the central lotus,” meaning the great bliss, and upon fire, moon, sun, Rāhu, and Kālāgni, the samaya being and the gnosis being come to be of one taste.82
The phrase “fire, moon, sun, Rāhu, and Kālāgni” is taken from the Shong translation.
Other translations can be somewhat different. It is taught that the consciousness-aggregate Akṣobhya, whose nature is the main deity, and the space-element Vajradhātvīśvarī are mother-and-father method and wisdom.
Such a statement is made in terms of pervading consciousness and gnosis being fused together within the being of the main deity and are not statements made on the basis of individual method and wisdom where, for example, consciousness-aggregate Akṣobhya in the form of method embraces one of his family, such as space-element Vajradhātvīśvarī, in the form of wisdom.
This is so because in the thinking of the hidden tantras, such as Guhyasamāja, Vairocana and Locanā, for example, embrace each other as same-family method and wisdom, whereas in Kālacakra thinking, method and wisdom involves mutual embracing between different families, while union within the same family is rejected.
As the Great Commentary says:
“From the mandala, for the sake of the highest bliss.” This refers to union between different families.83
Of the 634 figures whose colors, hands, and faces are actually mentioned in this section from the tantra and commentary on the sovereign mandala, apart from the desire and nondesire goddesses, the colors, implements, positions, seats, and so forth of all of them are clearly described,  and they can be known in the same way as the colors of the lunar-day deities described in the discussion above.
The colors of the desire and nondesire goddesses84 are the colors of the directions. Determining their hand implements in line with the implement symbols from which they are individually created, as the Puṇḍarīka Transmission Sadhana has done85 is in tune with the thinking of the tantra and commentary.
The Great Commentary says:
Therefore Vajra Śṛṅkhalā and the others go to their facing positions in families of the east and so forth.
Because of the family, in the first right hand of Śṛṅkhalā is a sword.86 This quote explains that the reason why the implements of the first hands of the wrathful goddesses are swords, for instance, is because they belong to that particular family. Similarly, although the hand implements of the desire and nondesire goddesses are not clearly taught, they can be known from the implements of the first hand of the families from which they are born. So from which families are they born?
This is clearly set out in the Great Commentary beginning from the line, “In the east born from Tārā, dividing into desire goddesses.” Wherever a particular desire goddess is born, so the corresponding nondesire goddess is also born.
How can the number of faces and hands be determined?
If they are to be determined by whoever creates each goddess, then the numbers of hands and faces would vary. Therefore I think that Sādhuputra’s assertion that they all have one face and two hands is correct.
His sādhana says:
In the offering substances to the left of the southern door are ka, kha, ga, gha, ṅa together with visarga.
From these syllables, and from individual implements, arise five desire goddesses with two hands and rabbit87 face.88
He also applies these descriptions to the nondesire goddesses.
In the Great Commentary it says:
From Vajradhātvīśvarī comes the goddess Tribhavāprāṇāpahārinecchā.
From Viśvamātā comes the goddess Utpādanaecchā.89
If these two were counted separately, as is quoted here, there would have to be thirty-eight desire goddesses. Therefore they should be counted as one. As the Great Commentary states:
The thirty-seven desire goddesses are in the speech mandala, divided into their families, in their respective positions.90 This states the number of desire goddesses to be thirty-seven.
These two counted as one pervade all thirty-six and therefore are not counted in the placement upon the mandala terraces. This is also applied to the nondesire goddesses.
The line “divided into their families, in their respective positions” clearly teaches placement.
However the Puṇḍarīka Transmission Sādhana says:
The desire and nondesire goddesses are presented here in forms similar to their creators, as was taught by Abhaya and Vibhūticandra.91
This means that desire and nondesire goddesses who are born from the caṇḍālī92 should have the faces of dogs, pigs, and so forth. Resolving Doubts Concerning the Process of Generation There are a few further areas of doubt to be examined.
These doubts can be put under four headings: 1.The generation of the main deities
2.The generation of the entourage deities
3.The seats of the deities
4.The number of deities on lotus seats The generation of the main deities
Sādhuputra’s sādhana states: From a completely formed white letter aṃ arises a mirrorlike gnosis moon mandala. From a completely formed red āḥ arises a sun mandala whose nature is the gnosis of equality.93 Thus the moon and sun, which are the bases for the placement of the vowels and consonants whose natures are the physical signs and marks of an enlightened being, arise from aṃ and āḥ respectively.
Later scholars  maintain that the moon arises from the thirty-two vowels and the sun from the consonants.
Their sources come from the Vajragarbha Commentary:
From the causes of a buddha’s signs,
the moon on which are thirty-two vowels. From a and so forth, from ka and so forth,
the three realms made pure will arise, lord of men.94
Also the Supreme and Unchanging Bliss summary says:
On top of that, from the chain of vowels and chain of consonants the moon and the sun.95
Thus they assert their positions with scriptural authority.
Rongpa Kālacakrapāda and his followers, as well as the Puṇḍarīka Transmission Sādhana,96 maintain as actually taught in the Great Commentary that the moon and sun are not created from seed syllables.
So who is right? Scholars have presented as scriptural authority the teaching that the phenomena of the three realms are produced from the letters a and ka and so forth, while the Supreme and Unchanging Bliss quote above teaches that the moon and sun seat of the main deity arises from the vowels and consonants. Therefore there is common ground in the scriptural authority.
Moreover the Supreme and Unchanging Bliss summary also says:
From a and so forth and ka and so forth, the moon and sun are produced by ha and kṣa.97
The moon is created from ha and the sun from kṣa, thereby explaining that the sun and moon arise from individual letters.
The text continues: The moon mandala is of the nature of the letter a or the letter ha, and the sun mandala is of the nature of the letter ra or the letter kṣa.98
This quote explains that the moon and sun as seats of the main deity also arise from the letter a and ra.
The visarga can be a development of either the letter ra or the letter sa, and therefore Sādhuputra’s assertion that the sun is created from āḥ is correct. The syllable aṃ is a development of āḥ, and therefore his statement that the moon is created from aṃ is correct.
The letter aṃ exists within the thirty-two vowels that are the causes of the thirty-two signs of a buddha, and therefore this conforms with the scriptural authority of the quote, “From the causes of a buddha’s signs, the thirty-two vowels as the moon.”99
In general, the sun and moon at this particular time should definitely arise from seed syllables, because at other times when the sun, moon, and so forth are created, they are created from seed syllables, and it is no different here.
Because of this Sādhuputra says that the moon and sun at this point arise from the letters aṃ and āṃ.
At the time of the main deity generation from the five enlightenments, Rongpa Kālacakrapāda and the Puṇḍarīka Transmission Sādhana do not develop the hand implement100 out of hūḥ.
This accords with the literal meaning of the Great Commentary.
The thinking of the Puṇḍarīka Transmission masters, however, is that the gnosis of analysis arises in the form of a vajra from the hūḥ in the center of the sun and moon marked with the consonants and vowels.
Illuminating Reality, when explaining the “generation stage devoid of generation stage,”101 expressed by verses such as the one beginning “Vowels and consonants in union”102 in the section on making prostrations to the definitive Kālacakra, states:
Prostration is to whom?
To resultant Kālacakra.
How does it differ?
The union of moon and sun, meaning in embrace and marked by vowels and consonants, the placement of the seed syllable hūḥ and the letter phaṭ blocking the flow of the elements at the tip of the vajra, and the meditations of the hand implement formed from the syllable as taught by the phrase “and so forth,” are all “abandoned.”103
This passage speaks of a meditation in which the five enlightenments are created by the moon and sun in embrace, marked by the vowels and consonants, in the center of which a hand implement arises from the hūḥ seed syllable.
This is also the thinking of the tantra because the tenth verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter of the Condensed Tantra states: On moon and sun, the vowels a and so forth,
the consonants ka and so forth, together with the vajra, and from the five, such as the mirrorlike, five light rays spread, pure light radiates. Meditate upon Kālacakra.104 Thus a meditation is taught in which moon and sun in embrace are marked with the vowels and consonants, and in their center is the vajra hand implement.
Similarly the Great Commentary, on the seventy-third verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
The seed syllable creates the implement, the implement creates the deity, and this is understood at all times by the yogi.
This is affirmed by the tantra.105
Sādhuputra’s sādhana also, from “Then on top of that the letter a” up to “the eighty consonants,”106 teaches the generation of the sun and moon marked by the vowels and consonants.
Immediately after this line the sādhana continues:
Then meditate that in their center is a blue letter hūḥ, from which arises a crossed vajra marked by hūḥ and which is of the nature of gnosis of analysis.
Then meditate on all three blending as one, adorned with the letter hi of the nature of gnosis of accomplishment.
Then every part of the body is complete, and the nature of the letter haṃ is the very pure gnosis of reality.
This is the glorious Kālacakra explained below in the section on prostration.
However the twenty-six armed one….107 “Crossed vajra” and “twenty-six armed one” refer to Vajravega. The rest applies to the creation of the main deity at this particular time. At this time the following occurs.
Sun and moon marked with consonants and vowels are the manifest enlightenments arising from the mirror like gnosis and the equality gnosis. In the center is a hūḥ from which arises a vajra marked with a hūḥ at its center. This is the enlightenment arising from the gnosis of analysis. The heart of this vajra together with the other previously mentioned manifest enlightenments, or alternatively, the heart of a vajra and hūḥ that has arisen from these manifest enlightenments blending into one, is “possessed of the letter hi,” meaning marked by the letter hi. This is the enlightenment of the gnosis of accomplishment.
From that comes the conqueror Kālacakra, all body parts complete, together with the letter haṃ. This is enlightenment of the reality gnosis.
The above should be explained in connection with the tantra and commentary.
The tantra states, “On moon and sun, the vowels a and so forth, the consonants ka and so forth, together with the vajra,” to which the commentary remarks, “Moon and seminal fluid are with the vowels” and further, “Sun and blood are with the consonants.”108 This explains that the vowels and consonants are held on moon and sun bases.
“Together with a vajra” indicates the vajra as a base.
The commentary on this begins, “Together with the gandharva letter hūḥ,”109 indicating the hūḥ held in the vajra.
With this in mind Sādhuputra says, “In their center is a blue letter hūḥ from which arises a crossed vajra marked by a hūḥ.” This vajra and the other enlightenments, or the vajra arising from these enlightenments blending into one, are marked by a hūḥ.
This vajra is that which “possesses,” and the letter hi is that which is “possessed.” On this the commentary says, “They become one together with the wind letter hi.” Just as the moon and sun “possess” the vowels and consonants, the letter hi must have a base, and that has to be the vajra.
With this in mind Sādhuputra writes, “All three blend as one, adorned with the letter hi of the nature of the gnosis of accomplishment.” From the vajra, the letter hūḥ, and the letter hi arises Kālacakra, every part of his body complete and marked by the letter haṃ.
This is indicated by commentary:
Then all parts of the body are complete, together with the consciousness syllable haṃ. This is the very pure gnosis of reality.110
Sādhuputra also says:
Then every part of the body is complete, and the nature of the letter haṃ is the very pure gnosis of reality. This is the glorious Kālacakra explained below in the section on prostration.
However the twenty-six armed one… How the main deity is actually created from the five enlightenments is subject to much disagreement.
However it has been settled by the strength of the explanations of the material from the tantra and commentary.111 The main deity Kālacakra that has been generated this way is meditated on as having the nature of Vajrasattva, the purified gnosis aggregate whose hands and faces, etc., are in the form of the main deity.
In the section on the withdrawal of the main mother-and-father deities and the eight śakti, the Great Commentary says, “Together with mudrā, the complete Vajrasattva.”112 This indicates that the complete generation of the main deity is the complete Vajrasattva.
This also teaches that the eight śakti are consorts of the main deity. The generation of the entourage deities
Most Tibetan scholars say that Akṣobhya and so forth in the form of the mandala assembly enter the body of the main deity and are melted by the fire of great desire into the form of bodhicitta, which then flows from the vajra to fall into the lotus of the mother.
There individual drops become the seed syllables of deities, which in turn transform into hand implements and finally into deities who emanate from the mother’s lotus to take their places on their seats within the external mandalas.
Some scholars maintain that when generating the deities of the sovereign mandala, first the base mandala is created again within the lotus of the consort, and then the dependent deities are generated in this lotus mandala and not to an outside mandala.
If they were emanated to an outside mandala, “this would mean that the samaya mandala would be complete, and the instruction to emanate a samaya mandala in the section on the sovereign activity would be incorrect.” As verification of this assertion they quote, “Here in the lotus of one’s consort” and so on.
Moreover the Great Commentary says on the nineteenth verse of the Condensed Tantra:
The melted moon emerges from one’s vajra into the lotus of one’s consort to transform into the mandala assembly of gods and goddesses, the full and complete base and dependents.113
They apparently think that “base and dependents” indicates that the mandala base, too, has to be created within the mother’s lotus, and that the line “emerges from one’s vajra into the lotus of one’s consort” teaches that the dependent deities and the base mandalas are only created within the lotus and are not emanated to an outside mandala.
To conclude from this that the meaning of the commentary is that from the drops falling into the mother’s lotus, both mandala base and dependent deities must be created within the lotus seems like a good explanation, but great masters of the past have explained “base” as meaning “seed.” Therefore who is correct needs to be investigated.
However to assert that the whole deity assembly of the sovereign mandala is completed by their creation within the mother’s lotus and that they do not emanate from the mother’s lotus to an outside mandala is not correct.
If it were, there would have to be an explanation on how the mother and father of the sovereign mandala along with the śakti are created within the lotus of the mother, but no such explanation is found in the tantra and commentary, nor can any such understanding be inferred. Furthermore, if the sovereign mandala were complete merely by the creation of the base mandala and the dependent deities within the mother’s lotus, consider this quote from the Great Commentary on the fiftieth verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter:
“Then the vajra holder also dissolves into the ‘moon.’” The word “also” means that the wisdom also dwells with mind vajra and gnosis vajra inside the avadhūtī and the śaṅkhinī.114 This says that when the main deity dissolves, the mother also dissolves. Therefore, when the mother dissolves, it must be accepted that the deities within the lotus of the mother also dissolve.
If that is the case, you must ask how it could be possible for the four goddesses to perform the arousal by song.115
Furthermore to assert that during the meditation of the sovereign mandala the deities do not emanate from the mother’s lotus to an outside mandala contradicts the tantra and commentary.
The Great Commentary from “The melted moon emerges from one’s vajra into the lotus” until “the full and complete base and dependents” teaches the formation of the base mandala and dependent deities within the mother’s lotus from the drops that have traveled there.
The Great Commentary continues:
Meditate upon Akṣobhya as the great lord who enters the body of the primordial buddha.116 This shows that Akṣobhya travels from the mother’s lotus to enter the body of the main deity. The text continues:
Then on the direction lotuses are emanated “ocean” buddhas, meaning four buddhas, of nine eyes, with “fire” faces, meaning three faces, and “time” hands, meaning six hands.
This emanation must be an emanation from the mother’s lotus, because the emanation from the father’s vajra into the lotus is taught immediately prior to this passage.
Therefore these passages from the Great Commentary teach that the deities emanate from the mother’s lotus and are placed in their cardinal and intermediate positions within the celestial mansion, and that means being placed within an external base mandala.
Furthermore the Great Commentary, on the fifty-first verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, in the section on deity emanation during the sovereign activities says:
For the sake of the samaya mandala, they enter one’s body and arrive at the wisdom lotus, on which stand the individual letters in the form of a mantra.
Then from the lotus, as before, characterized by their faces, hands, hand symbols, and forms, they emanate to the gnosis, mind, speech, and body mandalas.
In the phrase “again the mandalas are manifested,” the word again means “as before.”117
This means that in the section on the sovereign activity, the deities manifest with faces, hands, hand symbols, and forms and emanate to the gnosis, mind, speech, and body mandalas from the mother’s lotus, and all this is done in the same way that the previous emanation of the sovereign mandala was performed. Therefore the above assertion contradicts this tantra and commentary passage also. However the previous consequence, “this would mean that the samaya mandala would be complete, and the instruction to emanate a samaya mandala in the section on the sovereign activity would be incorrect,” still does not follow.
The purpose of initially visualizing an outside base mandala is to purify the mother’s womb into which one is conceived.
Creating the deities in the mother’s lotus during the sovereign-mandala meditation and sending them out from the lotus to take their place within the base mandala is for the purpose of purifying the aggregates, elements, and sources of the being inside the womb. Emanating the deities and placing them within the base mandala during the sovereign-activity meditation is for the purpose of purifying the aggregates at birth.
Therefore it does not follow that when the deity emanation of the sovereign-mandala meditation is complete, the creation of the samaya deities is also complete, because in terms of its base of purification, the samaya mandala emanation is not complete.
When the male and female tathāgatas are first emanated, Akṣobhya is meditated upon as the great lord embracing the consort Prajñāpāramitā and sent from the mother’s lotus to enter the body of the main deity.
This is taught by the previous quotes, beginning “Meditate upon Akṣobhya as the great lord” and “Akṣobhya enters.” However Vajrasattva embraced by consort and entering the main deity is not taught by the Great Commentary, nor is it implicit.
This is because the nature of the main deity is Vajrasattva, as has been made clear in the Great Commentary in a previous quote.118 The ten śakti are explained as being consorts of the main deity. Eight of them, excluding Prajñāpāramitā and Jñānapāramitā, are of the nature of the other eight perfections, beginning with the perfection of giving and so forth, and these are the eight goddesses, Kṛṣṇadīptā and so forth, placed upon the petals of the central lotus.
The two śakti in the east and southeast are of the air element.
Those of the south and southwest are of the fire element. Those of the west and northwest are of the earth element, and those of the north and northeast the water element.
Prajñāpāramitā is of the element of gnosis, and Jñānapāramitā is of the element of space.
Viśvamātā is of the nature of both Prajñāpāramitā and Jñānapāramitā while being generated in the aspect of Viśvamātā. This is because the consorts of the main deity are ascertained as being the ten śakti, and at this part of the generation stage, Viśvamātā also has to be established as being of the nature of a śakti.
The Great Commentary, on the sixteenth verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says: Jñānapāramitā is included within Viśvamātā.
The other eight paramitas of giving and so forth are the eight goddesses on the petals.119 Similarly, after Akṣobhya has been sent forth and has merged into one’s body, Vajradhātvīśvarī embraced by Vajrasattva is sent forth from the mother’s lotus and enters Viśvamātā. The reason for this will be explained in the section dealing with doubts concerning the numbers of deities on lotus seats.
There is no need for Prajñāpāramitā embraced by Akṣobhya to enter the mother because Viśvamātā is of the nature of Prajñāpāramitā.
If the nature of the main deity is Vajrasattva, then the following doubt might occur.
The Great Commentary says “with the crown of Vajra sattva,”120 thereby affirming that at this stage, the main deity has Vajrasattva as his crown.
However, in the Gnosis chapter, it says that gnosis is sealed by consciousness, and consciousness is sealed by gnosis.
Moreover the Great Commentary, on the sixtieth verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
“Now the crown” and so forth talks of the deities being sealed by their families. Here in the mandala of the supreme original buddha, on the crown is a vajra in the manner of two vajras crossed.
Because consciousness and gnosis are perfectly united.
Therefore gnosis is applied to consciousness, and consciousness is applied to gnosis.121 Therefore gnosis Vajrasattva and consciousness Akṣobhya are sealed by each other. Is this not contradictory?
There is no fault here.
The quote that the main deity, who has the nature of Vajrasattva, is adorned with the crown of Vajrasattva illustrates that here in the sovereign-mandala meditation, the main deity in the form of Kālacakra has the nature of Vajrasattva, and is a statement made on the basis of the main deity being generated in that way during the process of deity creation.
During the process of sealing, the statement that gnosis and consciousness are sealed by each other is made on the basis of Vajrasattva and Akṣobhya being of distinct forms  and being sealed by their family lord after the initiation meditation.122
The seats of the dieties
In the meditation on the celestial mansion foundation in its stacked arrangement, Rāhu is visualized on top of the moon and sun, but it is not the thinking of the tantra and commentary that Kālāgni is visualized on top of Rāhu.
The Great Commentary says:
On that is the letter haṃ, from which arises a moon mandala the size of the lotus center.
On that is a visarga, from which arises a sun mandala.
On that there is a drop, from which arises “fire,” meaning the mandala of Rāhu, dark blue in color. These all fuse into one to become haṃ kṣa ma la wa ra ya. Meditate on this as the seed syllable and think that from this the realms of the world are created.123 This teaches that Rāhu is visualized on top of a moon and sun, but it does not teach that Kālāgni is to be visualized on top of Rāhu.
Moreover, in ascending order, the ten letters of the powerful ten-syllable stack, such as the life-giving a and so forth, are the seed syllables of space, air, fire, water, earth, and Meru, in whose center is a lotus, moon, sun, and Rāhu.
There is no letter for Kālāgni separate from Rāhu.
On the meditation of this stacked arrangement as it is applied to the inner world, the Great Commentary says:
The three channels of excrement, urine, and fluid are the mandalas of the moon, sun, and Rāhu coming together at the center of the secret lotus.124 Thus no inner application is taught for Kālāgni separate from Rāhu. Some may wonder if the nāda125 of the drop is the seed syllable of Kālāgni?
If that were so, the powerful ten-syllable stack would not add up, because it would have to contain eleven seed syllables.
Furthermore, in this section on the meditation upon the stacked arrangement of the foundation mandalas, there is no mention of nāda visualization in the commentary on the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, as the previous quote reveals. Also the Great Commentary on the Realms chapter, in the section on the formation of the mantra, says: Haṃ kṣa ma la wa ra ya is the assembly of the worlds and the vajra body. In space the letter ya, the mandala of air. On top of that the ra fire mandala. On top of that the wa water mandala. On top of that the la earth mandala. On top of that the ma Meru.
That is the fifth. Above that the kṣa lotus of animate beings. On top of that the formless worlds ha. From the ha the visarga is the sun, the drop is the moon, and the nāda is the sign of the one-pointed vajra.126 The nāda, therefore, is drawn on top of the drop.
However it is not a seed syllable letter but symbolizes a one-pointed vajra, which in turn illustrates indestructibility.
Nowhere is it spoken of as being the seed syllable of Rāhu or Kālāgni.
Furthermore haṃ kṣa ma la wa ra ya is the mantra of the ten seed syllables, and there are ten corresponding phenomena that they illustrate. With this in mind, the Great Commentary quotes a passage from the Saṃgītī.
Ten parts of ten meanings, the mighty one of ten powers, the all-pervading master, accomplishing the wishes of all,
the great and powerful in ten aspects.127 However the Great Commentary says:
The secret lotus is like the lotus of the Conqueror.
The three channels of excrement, urine, and fluid are the mandalas of the moon, sun, and Rāhu coming together at the center of the secret lotus.128
Concerning this quote the question might arise, “In the secret lotus are found the moon and sun channels, and isn’t the central channel the śaṅkhinī channel of Kālāgni?” Generally there are many instances in the tantra and commentary of the three channels of excrement, urine, and fluid being termed the channels of the moon, sun, and Kālāgni.
However here the line “The three channels of excrement, urine, and fluid are the mandalas of the moon, sun, and Rāhu” does not teach the three channels to be those of the moon, sun, and Kālāgni but teaches that these three channels correlate with the outer phenomena of the moon, sun, and Rāhu.
Likewise “The secret lotus is like the lotus of the Conqueror” explains that the mother’s secret lotus and the visualized lotus are correlated phenomena.
Similarly it is also correct to say that the seat of the main deity is either Rāhu or Kalāgni upon a moon disk, but to posit both Rāhu and Kālāgni is not the intention of the tantra and commentary.
Again and again the tantra and commentary talk of the three seats of moon, sun, and Rāhu or Kālāgni, and that arrangement perfectly fits the outer-inner correlation, whereas four seats does not.
How is this taught in the tantra and commentary? In the first summary from the Realms chapter it says:
Mandalas of air, fire, water, and earth, Meru, lotus, moon, sun, and Kālāgni, on top of these, upon Īśvara and the head of Māra,
his feet with those of the mother of existence.129
Similarly, from the second summary from the Realms chapter:
“Sitting on the vajra lion throne.” The vajra lion throne is of moon, sun, and Agni mandalas, indestructible and indivisible. Alternatively the letter e of the element of space is the vajra-lion throne.130
In the fourth summary from the Realms chapter it says: “The Buddha sat upon the lion throne.” The lion throne is of the element of space. Alternatively, sitting upon the lion throne of moon, sun, and Agni mandalas, he “sat upon the lion throne.”131 These quotes show that the teacher of the tantra in the form of the main deity of the mandala sat in the center of the mandala on a seat of moon, sun, and Agni, and the seat of the visualized mandala should be similar.
The second verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter says:
Feet on moon, sun, and Agni mandalas, upon Māra and Rudra.132
The Great Commentary on the ninth verse of Methods of Accomplishment chapter says:
Half that size is the lotus of the Conqueror. Its center takes up one third of the lotus, as does the moon, sun, and Rāhu mandalas.133
On the tenth verse Also:
In the center of the mandala, the mandalas of the moon, sun, and Rāhu, and on the moon mandala are thirty vowels.134
On the eleventh verse:
“On the central lotus, on moon, sun, and Agni,” means upon the lalanā, rasanā, and avadhūtī.135 The Great Commentary on the fifty-seventh verse of the Initiation chapter, in the section on the placing of the deity symbols, says:
“The color of the variegated lotus of the conquering lord” refers to the color green.136 “On a moon, sun, and Agni is the letter hūḥ.” At the end of the empty sky, the moon, sun, and Rāhu join, and the seat of the mandala is well endowed with the moon, sun, and Agni.
Inside, well endowed with lalanā, rasanā, and avadhūtī, is the heart lotus. On top of that the moon, sun, and Rāhu, on top of that the letter hūḥ to be drawn using blue powder. In some of these passages the name “Rāhu” is used and in others “Kālāgni” is used.
Sometimes when the term “Kālāgni” is used in the tantra, it is commented upon using the name “Rāhu.” This is done to indicate that either name can be understood as Rāhu or Kālāgni.
Likewise the Great Commentary on the sixty-first verse of the Initiation chapter, when explaining the seed syllables of the seat of the main deity, says:
In the center the letters aṃ, āṃ, and a. These are the individual seats of the moon, sun, and Rāhu.138 Here only the three syllables of moon, sun, and Rāhu are taught.
In the Shong translation of the Great Commentary, on the fifty-fourth verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, it says:
“In the great bliss and upon fire,” meaning on moon, sun, Rāhu, and Kālāgni, the samaya being and the gnosis being come to be of one taste.139
However other translations say, “‘on fire,’ meaning on moon, sun, Rāhu, or Kālāgni mandalas,” thereby positing either Rāhu or Kālāgni. Therefore, using an accurate translation, there are no passages teaching a stacking of both Rāhu and Kālāgni as seats of the main deity.
Furthermore the way that these three stacked seats of the main deity are applied to inner and outer phenomena is as taught in the previous quote from the Initiation chapter, where Kālāgni is used in the line “on a moon, sun, and Agni,” which is from the tantra, and Rāhu is used in the commentary in the line “At the end of the empty sky, the moon, sun, and Rāhu join.”140 In the external world, in the empty sky, the sun and moon are sometimes eclipsed by Kālāgni and sometimes by Rāhu, and the thinking behind the above quote is that just as eclipses can be caused by either Rāhu or Kālāgni,  so the seat of the main deity can have either Rāhu or Kālāgni on top of the moon and sun.
If this were not the case, the external world would not correlate with either the Other or the Inner, because it is impossible for the sun or the moon to be eclipsed simultaneously by Rāhu and Kālāgni. As the Great Commentary says:
Inside, well endowed with lalanā, rasanā, and avadhūtī, is the heart lotus. On top of that the moon, sun, and Rāhu.141 Therefore, when meditating on the stacked arrangement with Rāhu on top of moon and sun, the three seats correlate with the left, right, and central channel at the heart. When meditating on the stacked arrangement with Kālāgni, the three seats correlate with the channels of excrement, urine, and fluid gathered at the secret area.
This assertion of three seats consisting of moon, sun, and Rāhu or Kālāgni is in accord with the thinking of venerable Gyaltsap’s Six Yogas and with the Jé Tsongkhapa’s Notes on Kālacakra.
The number of deities on lotus seats Although it is not actually taught in the Methods of Accomplishment chapter that the eight nāgas and the eight fierce females are on lotus seats, such an assertion, as taught in the Kālacakrapāda Transmission, is valid, because in the Inner chapter, 156 lotus-seated deities are mentioned, and the eight nāgas and eight fierce females are included among them.
So how are these lotus-seated deities counted? This is under two headings: 1.The tantra and commentary passages to be explained 2.Determining the number of deities by explaining the above passages The tantra and commentary passages to be explained
The Great Commentary says: The ten perfections are the ten śakti. Uṣṇīṣa and so forth are the ten wrathful ones. Thus there are ten of each.142
“Five are the buddhas and goddesses” refers to the five buddhas Akṣobhya and so forth and the five goddesses Vajradhātvīśvarī and so forth. Thus there are five of each.143 Also:
Rūpavajrā and others making six, and Kṣitigarbha and the others to make six.
Thus there are six of each.144 Of Indra and so forth there are twelve.145 Carcikā and others make eight, Ananta and others make eight, and Śvānavaktrā and others make eight.146 Therefore the śakti and the wrathful protectors make twenty.
The ten male and female tathāgatas and the twelve male and female bodhisattvas bring the total to forty-two.
Twelve main lunar-day deities and the twenty-four deities consisting of eight yoginīs, eight wrathful females, and eight female nāgas make thirty-six, bringing the total to seventy-eight.
The Great Commentary states:
Again these are divided into wisdom and method. Therefore, multiplied by two, there are 104 Kālacakras. Half of that comes to fifty-two deities.147
Again, individually, 156 deities should be known within the Kālacakra.148
These quotes talks of deities individually and in union.
Therefore in union they number seventy-eight and individually 156.
After the above quote the text continues: “These are determined as being the assembly of deities within the center of lotuses,” thereby ascertaining that each of these deities is positioned within the center of a lotus.
These are the principal deities of the mandala as presented in the Condensed Tantra.
This can be understood from the text following “Śvānavaktrā and others to make eight,” which says:
All these deities are each differentiated by name in the Methods of Accomplishment chapter.149 By counting the deities and consorts individually, how does one arrive at 156?
It is like this.
The four tathāgatas, Amoghasiddhi and so forth, the four female tathāgatas, Tārā and so forth, the twelve male and female bodhisattvas, the eight yoginis, the twelve deities of the lunar months, the eight nāgas and the eight wrathful females are clearly enumerated both individually and with consort in the Methods of Accomplishment chapter.
The ten śakti can be counted individually and with consort as follows.
As quoted above, “Jñānapāramitā is included within Viśvamātā,” which means that Jñānapāramitā is combined within Viśvamātā, who has the nature of Prajñāpāramitā.
Viśvamātā being of the nature of two śakti and embracing the main deity thus forms two mother-and-father pairs. The eight śakti arranged upon the lotus petals one by one embrace the main deity in the center, thereby forming eight mother-and-father pairs.
This is how the ten śakti become the ten mother-and-father pairs. Akṣobhya embraced by Prajñāpāramitā enters the main deity, and Vajradhātvīśvarī embraced by Vajrasattva enters the mother to form two mother-and-father pairs in union and also to stand in the main mother-and-father lotus center.
Vajradhātvīśvarī embraced by Vajrasattva and entering the mother is not explicitly taught in the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, but it has to be this way because Vajradhātvīśvarī embraced by a father deity is explained as being a lotus-seated deity in the Condensed Tantra, but no separate lotus seat is mentioned for them.
The ten mother-and-father wrathful-protector pairs comprise five from the mind mandala and, excluding Uṣṇīṣacakrī, five of the body mandala.
Uṣṇīṣacakrī of the body mandala is one with Uṣṇīṣacakrī of the mind mandala and is therefore not counted separately. If it were, the wrathful protectors would number eleven, which would directly contradict the Great Commentary.
Moreover those who do not count the ten śakti as being ten consort pairs, those who count Vajrasattva mother and father apart from the main deity, and those who do not count Vajradhātvīśvarī embraced by consort also contradict the Great Commentary.
Furthermore to use the quote “in the lap of method, wisdom is not the main deity, and in the lap of wisdom, method is not the main deity” as the reason for not including Vajradhātvīśvarī who enters the mother embraced by the father is just wrong, because when Vajradhātvīśvarī is embraced by the father, it is a case of the father being in the lap of wisdom.150 The mother, therefore, becomes the main deity.
That will be discussed later, and this will suffice for the time being. Concerning the 156 lotus-seated deities plus the six sealing deities, the Great Commentary says:
Now it is taught how the Condensed Tantra arose from the Supreme and Original Buddha. The twenty more than 1,600 supreme and original buddhas were divided by thirty to become fifty-four deities.
This again was multiplied by the three mandalas of body, speech, and mind to become sixty-two more than a hundred.151 The principal deities were compiled and condensed from the 1,620 deities of the Root Tantra mandala.
The mandala of the Root Tantra is known as the glorious constellation mandala. On this the Great Commentary says:
The Buddha has said that the assembly of deities in the Supreme and Original Buddha mandala of constellations are of the number of hours in the constellations.152
162 lotus-seated deities, including the six sealing deities, were compiled and taught from the assembled deities of the glorious constellation mandala. The thinking behind this is that after meditating upon the Kālacakra deities, the bases are to be purified, and these are the 156 main channels of the six cakras plus the channels of the six families.
The channels of the six families are, “lalanā, rasanā, and avadhūtī, and the flow of excrement, urine, and fluid.” Thus 162 channels are taught.
The 156 channels are mentioned in the Great Commentary in a passage that runs from “Likewise the channels of Kālacakra are taught.
There are four at the crown” until “encircled by thirty-two”153 These are the four channel petals at the crown, eight at the heart, sixteen at the forehead, thirty-two at the throat, sixty-four at the navel, and thirty-two in the secret place.
Of these, six inner petals and ten intermediate petals of the secret-area channels act as bases for the creation of illnesses caused by a combination of wind, bile, and phlegm.
The four petals of the crown and the sixteen of the forehead are bases for phlegm illnesses. The thirty-two petals of the throat and the eight of the heart are bases for bile-related illnesses. The sixty-four petals of the navel and the sixteen outer petals of the secret area are bases for wind-related problems.
Of the 156 channels in these particular aspects, the Great Commentary says:
Therefore the 156 are channels that dwell in the nature of the Kālacakra gods and goddesses and that bring death to ordinary beings.154 Therefore the 156 channels in purified form are in essence the male and female deities.
Those same channels bring death to ordinary beings who lack the skilful means.
When possessed of these means, they enjoy not only long life and health but also the achievement of supreme enlightenment.
The Great Commentary says:
Within the six cakras the 156 channels are to be understood as channels of Kālacakra.
These death-bringing channels, by the power of the guru’s teaching, also bring long life and health.
The Kālacakra channels are said to dwell within the six channel wheels, and when meditated upon in accord with the guru’s instruction, the fear of death will be destroyed. To the yogi this is nothing special.155
Therefore the 156 channels are to be meditated upon as being Kālacakra lotus-seated deities or are to be perceived as channels for purification.
If they are meditated upon as the 156 lotus-seated deities, long life and health will follow.
For the yogi this alone is nothing special, for far greater is the attainment of the supreme siddhi of enlightenment that will follow.
Will such attainments come about by meditating only upon the generation stage as a purifier of the channels?
From this practice alone they will not, but generation-stage meditations ripen the mind for the creation of the completion stage, and then with “certainty from the guru,” meaning instructions of the guru, if one meditates upon the six-branched yoga of the completion stage, the temporary achievements of long life and good health, as well as the permanent attainment of the supreme siddhi, will come about.
The Great Commentary states: Again, in each of the 162 channels flow the ten winds and forms in the nature of the ten elements and aggregates.
These in total multiplied by ten become twenty more than 1,600, the number of hours within the twenty-seven constellations.
Similarly there are that number of main deities of wisdom and method within the glorious constellation mandala of the Supreme and Original Buddha.
From this vast constellation mandala the deities of the nonultimate mundane flowing elements of phlegm and so forth bring about the accomplishments of physical or worldly siddhis. For these attainments Mañjuśrī taught the six main cakras and ascertained the number of Kālacakra channels.156
This passage explains that ten winds together with the five aggregates and five elements flow within each of the 162 channels. Therefore externally there are 1,620 Root Tantra gods and goddesses divided into method and wisdom within the glorious mandala of constellations, and that by 1,620 generation-stage meditations, worldly siddhis such as the siddhi of peace, are directly achieved, while indirectly the temporary achievements of health and extended life and the permanent attainment of the supreme siddhi will be attained.
The part of the passage beginning “From this vast constellation mandala” teaches that in the nonultimate worldly generation stage, one meditates upon the deities that nourish the element channels of phlegm and so forth, as mentioned above, and directly attain worldly siddhi or, indirectly, health and long life, as well as the supreme siddhi.
To this end the conqueror Mañjuśrī compiled the Condensed Tantra deities from the Root Tantra, and these deities are the lotus-seated deities that purify the 156 channels of the six main cakras.
Immediately after the sentence ending “ascertained the number of Kālacakra channels,” the Great Commentary continues:
“Six” and so forth talks of guarding the channels of the six families. It is said that in the body, the cakras of these six channels are to be halted. They are in three pathways. Above, the moon, sun, and Rāhu dwell in the paths of the left, right, and center.
Below, divided into moon, sun, and Agni, they dwell in the paths of excrement, urine, and fluid.
These the yogi protects in the body.
“By the instruction of the guru.” The instruction of the guru is the six-branched yoga, and that will bring protection from death.
“They bring death to living creatures,” because the winds flow within these six.
If the winds flow in the six, at that time and at all times, men will definitely be destroyed by death.
Among the six is “the subtle,” or the central avadhūtī. If the winds do not enter “the subtle,” “how will the yogis destroy the realm of death?” Definitely they will not destroy the realm of death.157
In this passage the text beginning from the sentence, “They bring death to living creatures” up to the last sentence, “Definitely, they will not destroy the realm of death,” teaches that the winds of karma enter the six channels — the three upper left, right, and central channels and the three lower channels of excrement, urine, and fluid. And as long as their flow is not halted and the winds do not flow solely in the central avadhūtī, then for so long will death continue to destroy.
The text from “In the body” until “These the yogi protects in the body” teaches that the life-sustaining wind and downwardly expelling wind, which flow and dwell in the three upper and three lower channels, are halted and brought to the central channel, and that the yogi will accomplish the temporary fruits of protection from physical death and illness as well as the permanent attainment of the supreme siddhi.
How is this accomplished?
The 156 lotus-seated deities together with the six sealing deities are focused on as being the purifiers of 162 channels comprising the 156 channel petals of the six main cakras together with the right, left, and central channel and the three channels of excrement, urine, and fluid, known collectively as the channels of the six families. This generation-stage practice ripens the continuum, after which the six-branched yoga, as instructed by the guru, is meditated upon. The winds of each channel then enter the central channel to induce the unchanging bliss. The yogi is protected from illness and death and accomplishes the supreme siddhi. This process is taught in the lines, “How?
‘By the instruction of the guru.’” The instruction of the guru is the six-branched yoga and that will bring protection from death.” To summarize: from the fifty-third verse through to half of the sixtieth verse of the Inner chapter of the Condensed Tantra, the tantra and commentary teach the application of the deities of the Root Tantra and Condensed Tantra to the channels of the body, as illustrated by the quote: “Śakti” and so forth teach the number of Kālacakra gods and goddesses. The assembly of deities is in the nature of the various channels of the six cakras.158
This meditative application teaches a generation stage in which the channels are visualized as being deities or concentrated on as purifiers. The purpose of these meditations is taught by three quotes:
The yogi, who is “the glorious Mañjuvajra, destroys the fears of samsara, and this alone creates a buddha.” This determines the arising of deities of the Root Tantra and Condensed Tantra.159 Two previous quotes run, “the fear of death will be destroyed.
To the yogi this is nothing special” and “These the yogi protects in the body.” The attainments taught in these quotes depend upon the winds being held in the central channel.
This actually occurs during the six-branched yoga of the completion stage. However, to create such a completion stage, the mind must definitely be ripened by the generation stage. Therefore the main purpose of the generation stage is to ripen the mind, which then becomes the main cause of the creation of the special completion stage in which the winds are held within the central channel.
Therefore, if the words of these quotes from the tantra and commentary are correctly understood, the maligning of the generation stage as not being a cause of enlightenment is easily refuted.
A complete generation stage acting as a ripening agent of the mind in order to create the special completion stage must come first in the sequence of generation and completion stages, and it is in order to make this very clear that the meaning of these quotes has been explained.
This has been just a brief explanation of how certain doubts arising at this point can be cleared up.
The meditations that follow the previously explained emanations of the desire and nondesire goddesses are discussed in the Great Commentary by the lines “In the nature of the five kinds of gnosis” until “are initiated for compassion.”160  From the heart of oneself as the conqueror Kālacakra, who has the nature of the five kinds of gnosis, light rays emanate to bring into the mandala every sentient being of the six types.
Light rays again emanate from one’s heart to summon Vairocana and the other mother-and-father tathāgatas and to place them in one’s heart. There the fire of desire arising from oneself in mother-and-father embrace melts the mother-and-father tathāgatas into bodhicitta, which then flows to the secret area and from one’s vajra to initiate the sentient beings.
Every sentient being touched by these bodhicitta light rays is transformed into a deity having three or a varying number of faces. Their essence is method and wisdom, and they are filled with the happiness of the supreme joy. With a brief glance these sentient beings become of the nature of the body-mandala assembly. Then they are focused upon in sequence, which involves the following.
To their seed syllable kṣa is added the vowels a, i, ṛ, u, ḷ in both long and short form, the five guṇa letters plus aṃ, the five vṛddhi161 letters plus āḥ, and the five semivowels in short and long form.162 These thirty-two syllables merge into their winds and reemerge as thirty-two deities.
The five aggregates of these sentient beings become the five tathāgatas, their five elements become the five mothers, the twelve inner and outer sources become the twelve male and female bodhisattvas, their five action faculties become the five wrathful guardians, and the activities of the five action faculties become the fierce females.
These deities then travel to their respective buddha realms. This meditation is a compassion initiation and correlates with one’s deeds as a buddha and not to normal existence.
On this meditation the Great Commentary says: The letter of the whole consonant group is kṣa. Therefore whatever the first consonant of the name, this covers all.163 This means that the letter kṣa is a combination of the first consonant ka and the last consonant sa, which is changed to the retroflex ṣ. This conjunct covers the whole range of consonants, and therefore, when all sentient beings are visualized and initiated as one, kṣa becomes the seed syllable, and the first consonant of the name of the deities also becomes a seed syllable.
When individual beings are being initiated, the first consonant of that individual’s name becomes the seed syllable.
How does the letter sa develop into retroflex ṣa? The grammar texts say:
“From the letter ka the following sa becomes ṣa.” Therefore sa is changed to ṣa.
The letter ka, without its life-giving vowel a, is placed on top of the letter sa to become kṣa.
If this meditation is to be performed more extensively, every sentient being enters one’s heart, where they are melted into bodhicitta.
They are brought into the mother’s womb, where the first consonant of every sentient being’s name becomes a seed syllable to be transformed into the deity.
The rest of the meditation proceeds as before.
This has been an explanation of the branch of the body-vajra approach, a meditation on the sovereign mandala, correlating with the formation of a body inside the womb. The Speech Vajra The branch of the speech vajra near accomplishment: A meditation on sovereign activities, correlating with birth and the engaging in the activities of the action faculties This has six outlines: 1.Arousing by song 2.Arising and mandala generation
3.Summoning the wisdom beings to enter
4.Sealing by family
5.Blessings of body, speech, and mind
6.Purity meditation Arousing by song At the end of the nine months in the womb, the development of the body is complete, but the winds of the five mandalas, or the ten winds such as the life-sustaining wind, downwardly expelling wind,  and so forth are still rigidly bound inside the central channel, not entering or leaving through the upper and lower openings. However, in the tenth or “becoming” month, the winds operate through the upper openings, which results in the development of vocal capacity and in the engaging of consciousness with outer objects through the individual senses.
At the end of the sixteenth year for males and the twelfth year for females, these beings will be able to engage in the joys of the movements of their elements. It is for these purposes that the winds of the four inner elements stir and encourage birth into the outside world. In correlation with that process, the mother-and-father main deities, who have dissolved and transformed into a drop, are encouraged to emerge by the four goddesses of the four elements.
On the dissolution of mother and father, the Great Commentary says:
On the deity the letter ho is inscribed in the avadhūtī path at the navel and crown. At the forehead is the body-vajra oṃ, at the throat the speech-vajra āḥ, and at the heart the mind-vajra hūḥ. This arising of body, speech, and mind are of the characteristics of the moon, sun, and Rāhu.164 With oneself as the main deity, oṃ appears at the forehead, āḥ at the throat, hūḥ at the heart, and hoḥ165 appears in the avadhūtī at the navel and crown. This arising of the enlightened body, speech, and mind correlates with the left, right, and center channels of moon, sun, and Rāhu in the womb. The Great Commentary continues:
By the lights of gnosis of the letter hoḥ at the navel, dissolution and bliss is experienced. On the lotuses the body, speech, and mind vajras are melted by the passion for Prajñā. In the line, “As well as the all-pervading vajra master,” the words “as well as” mean becoming like the moon together with Prajñā.166 The great passion of the embrace of the wisdom mother causes the caṇḍālī fire of the navel letter hoṃ to blaze. Its rays of gnosis bring about great bliss in the main deity, the all-pervading Vajradhara of the three vajras, who then dissolves into a moonlike bodhicitta drop.
This involves not only the main deity, because the words “as well as” indicate that the wisdom woman Viśvamātā and the eight śakti also dissolve with the main deity.
The arousing by song from this dissolution is performed as follows. The four goddesses who perform the song arousal correlate with the winds of the four mandalas that encourage the unborn child’s birth into the outside world.
The four goddesses are the mandala goddesses Locanā, Māmakī, Pāṇḍarā, and Tārā. They are of the essence of earth, water, fire, and air and of equanimity, joy, compassion, and love.
The objects to be aroused by their songs are the mother-and-father deities, who have dissolved into a drop.
This correlates with the point of birth, up to when the consciousness has been in a dream state since the seventh month. The Great Commentary says: Like consciousness in a dream being urged into the waking state, the goddesses, Locanā and the others, urge for the sake of sentient beings.167 The actual arousing from dissolution is found in Root Tantra verses quoted in the commentary.
Locanā arouses the gnosis vajra of the main conqueror with these words: I, Locanā, mother of sentient beings,
dwell in the “similar to cause” effect within the yogi168
by the nature of my mandala.
Arise, Kālacakra, fulfill my desire.169
The meaning of these words is that I, Locanā, the purified form of the element of earth, am the mother that produces the gnosis of the ārya in sentient beings. My winds of the earth element are held unmoving in the avadhūtī at the yogi’s navel. This brings about an effect similar to the cause, which means that the fluid travels from the jewel to the navel to produce the dwelling in great bliss.
Therefore Kālacakra, gnosis vajra, arise from the fluid and fulfill my desires by emanating the deities of the gnosis mandala.
Māmakī arouses the body vajra with these words: I, Māmakī, the sister,
dwell in the ripening within the yogi
by the nature of my mandala.
Arise, Kālacakra, fulfill my desire. This means that I, Māmakī, the purified form of the element of water, am the sister showing the yogi the fortune of great bliss. I dwell within the ripened result that occurs during the yogi’s path of practice — the great bliss of the fluid reaching the water-element heart center.
This bliss arises by my element of water holding the winds unmoving at the heart.
Therefore Kālacakra, body vajra, arise from the fluid and fulfill my desires by emanating the deities of the water-element family. Pāṇḍarā arouses the speech vajra:
I, Pāṇḍarā, the daughter,
dwell in the personally created result within the yogi
by the nature of my mandala.
Arise, Kālacakra, fulfill my desire.171 I, Pāṇḍarā, the purified form of the fire element, am the daughter, the granter of good qualities, who dwells in the personally created result172 that is the great bliss arising during the yogi’s path of practice when the fluid travels to the fire-element throat center.
This arises because my element of fire holds the winds unmoving at the throat.
Therefore, Kālacakra, in the nature of the speech vajra, arise from the fluid and fulfill my desires by emanating the deities of the fire-element family. Tārā arouses the mind vajra:
I, Tārā, the niece,
dwell in the eradication result within the yogi
by the nature of my mandala.
Arise, Kālacakra and fulfill my desire.173 I, Tārā, the purified form of the element of air, am the niece born from the sister that is the fluid held at the heart.
I dwell in the eradication result that is the great bliss of the fluid having traveled from the throat to the crown during the yogi’s path of practice.
This arises because my element of air holds the airs unmoving at the crown.
Therefore Kālacakra, in the nature of the mind vajra, arise from the fluid and fulfill my desires by emanating the deities of the air-element family. How can the great bliss arising from the bodhicitta arriving at the crown be an eradication result?
This differs from the other three and is similar to the unchanging bliss of the Buddha being equated with the nature body. Therefore there is no fault here.174
In unison all four goddesses sing:
From the experiences of the emptiness mandala,
with the thought to save sentient beings,
great protector of sentient beings, emanate the mandalas of body, speech, and mind.175 This means that “You, mighty protector who shields sentient beings from suffering, with the greatly compassionate thought of bringing sentient beings out of samsara, emanate the deity assembly of the body, speech, and mind mandalas from your accomplishment and experience of the emptiness, or space, mandala that is the bliss of dissolution into fluid.” On this section of arousal by song, the Great Commentary says:
The arousing is of two kinds. The first is to complete the winds; the second is for the completion of the joy at the end of the sixteenth year.176
On the meaning of this quote, scholars 177 have said:
Two kinds of arousal are taught: one for the completion of the winds, one for the completion of joy. Therefore it is evident that there also has to be a song arousal at the end of the drop yoga, but the lamas of the past only posited it once.
The meaning, however, of the quote beginning “The arousing is of two kinds” is that there are two ordinary bases to which the arousal is directed.
The first is the sentient being inside the womb being aroused to emerge into the outside world in order to complete the development of the winds flowing externally.
The second is the fluid, which is aroused to travel to the opening of the organ in order to complete the development of the joy of element emission at the end of the sixteenth year of life.
The dissolution song arousal correlates with the first.
The subtle and drop yoga meditations that focus on joy correlate with the second kind of arousal, during which there is no dissolution of the main deity, and so arousal from dissolution by song is not necessary. It is with this in mind that lamas of the past only posited it once. Arising and mandala generation This is under two headings: 1.Arising from the fluid into the forms of the main mother and father
2.Emanation of the mandalas
Arising from the fluid into the forms of the main mother and father
The conqueror, well immersed in emptiness, is awoken by the four goddesses’ melodic arousal and sees all beings as like illusions. From the melted moon fluid arises a blue hūḥ, from that a five-pointed blue vajra, and from that arises the main deity in the form of Kālacakra, in essence Akṣobhya. To indicate that, he wears the crown of Akṣobhya and is embraced by Vajradhātvīśvarī Viśvamātā.
As this passage from the Great Commentary indicates, the main deity embraced by Viśvamātā, who is in essence Vajradhātvīśvarī, is generated together with the eight śakti and is followed by the other deities.
Some assert the causal Vajradhara main deity of the sovereign mandala to be in essence Akṣobhya and the Vajradhara of the sovereign activities to be of the nature of Vajrasattva.
However, as evidenced by a previous quote, the tantra and commentary assert the causal Vajradhara to be of the nature of Vajrasattva.178 Moreover that resultant Vajradhara is in the nature of Akṣobhya, and that his consort is in the nature of Vajradhātvīśvarī can be understood from the Great Commentary when it explains that the main deity mother-and-father samaya beings are of one taste with the gnosis beings: Here, in the generation yoga, in the stages of generation, “consciousness is together with space,” meaning together with Vajradhātvīśvarī, “within the central lotus,” meaning the great bliss, and upon fire, moon, sun, Rāhu or Kālāgni, the samaya beings and the gnosis beings come to be of one taste.179 In this passage, “consciousness” refers to Akṣobhya, who is in the nature of consciousness.
Any contradiction arising from the statement that this embrace has to be with different families can be resolved as previously explained.180
Arising from the arousal by song into the forms of the main mother and father correlates with birth from the womb as a basis of purification. Emanation of the mandalas
Some say, “Visualize that they enter their respective deities of the emanated gnosis, mind, speech, and body mandalas.” They maintain that the deities are emanated from the mother’s lotus and visualized as entering the deities dwelling on the base mandala who were emanated during the sovereign-mandala practice.
That contradicts the Great Commentary quote beginning, “For the sake of the samaya mandala,”181 which states that the deity emanation in the sovereign activities is to the samaya mandala.
Furthermore the Great Commentary states:
In the phrase “again the mandalas are manifested,” the word again means “as before.”182
This quote also damages the above assertion, because it says that the deity emanation here is similar to that of the sovereign mandala.
Therefore, after the main deity father and mother plus the śakti have been created during the sovereign-mandala meditations: By the power of method-and-wisdom union, the five mandala buddhas come to the space above and enter one’s body for the sake of the samaya mandala possessing the nature of the aggregates, elements, sources, and so forth. They come to the lotus of Prajñā as mantras in the form of individual letters.183 As this passage indicates, the sound of bliss that emanates from the main deity mother and father in union calls the male and female tathāgatas of the nature of the five mandalas, and all the other deities placed in the previously emanated mandala up to the desire and nondesire goddesses, into the space above, and for the purpose of a samaya mandala, which is in the nature of the aggregates, elements, and sources, they enter one’s body, where they are melted by the fire of great bliss and sent to the mother’s lotus. There in the form of the individual letters of the deities, they transform into the symbols of the different deities and then to the deities themselves, and are sent from the mother’s lotus to the base mandala.
In the quote beginning, “Then in the lotus, as before,”184 the Great Commentary confirms that this has to be done as it was during the sovereign-mandala practice .
Therefore deity emanation within the sovereign activities correlates with the moment immediately after birth when the fully developed body, still wrapped in the “clothes of the placenta,” clearly exists in the outside world. It starts to cry, and the ten winds, or winds of its five elements, engage with the outside. This is confirmed by the Great Commentary:
As before, again the mandalas of mind, speech, and form, in the nature of method and wisdom, are emanated, and the newborn child awakens and cries.185
In the phrase “again the mandalas are manifested” the word again means “as before.” When the child emerges from the womb, the ten winds, such as the life-sustaining and so forth, are born.
When the disciples enter the mandala, flowers are scattered.
The purification of “the naked child in the clothes of the placenta” is the completion of the mandala of the samaya deities.186
Furthermore the lines beginning “Inside, the five mandalas flow” also teach the objects of correlation and the bases for purification.
Summoning the wisdom beings to enter After the desire and nondesire goddesses have been emanated, the wisdom beings are summoned.
This is done by Vajravega, who is in essence the purified gnosis wind, as indicated by the line “The pure winds of the central channel, Vajravega.” His color and number of faces and hands are as described in the lines “of blue light” and so forth in the Methods of Accomplishment chapter of the Great Commentary.
He emerges in that form from a vajra, which in turn has emerged from hūḥ, as indicated by the line “an emanation of hūḥ and vajra.”187 “Arising from wisdom and method”188 indicates that he arises from the wisdom mother and the method father in embrace and is emanated from the lotus of the mother.
On this the Great Commentary says: Here the winds of the central channel within the newborn child arise.
They are of blue light. Their arising awakens the sense organs, and the six consciousnesses engage with external phenomena. This is the inner.189 Therefore the emanation of Vajravega correlates with the time when the fifty-six and a quarter gnosis winds in the central channel of the newborn child begin to flow. This awakens the sense organs, and the six consciousnesses engage with external objects.
Concerning the emanation of Vajravega the Great Commentary says: Then from the lotus of the navel the winds emerge, summon external phenomena, and then return. Therefore the pure, stainless light goes forth and decisively pierces with vajra hook the navel of the mighty one of the wisdom assembly and binds his twenty-four arms with a vajra-serpent190 lasso. He frightens him with his weapons, gathers the wisdom assembly, moves the entire assembly of various phenomena, and then returns home.191
As this passage says, this is a meditation in which the manifested Vajravega pierces with his vajra hook the navel of Kālacakra, the mighty one of the wisdom assembly and the principal deity of the wisdom beings.
He binds Kālacakra’s twenty-four arms with his vajra-serpent lasso, summons the mighty one of the wisdom assembly by terrifying him with his other weapons, invokes the various deities of the mandala, and then returns to absorb into his abode within the heart of the main deity.
This correlates with the time of birth when the life-sustaining wind emerges from the lotus of the navel cakra to summon the consciousnesses to their respective objects and then returns to the lotus of the navel cakra.
The Great Commentary says, “The wisdom assembly is well served,”192 meaning that offerings are made to the invited assembly of wisdom beings.
It continues:
Concerning the absorption, the consciousness of sight born from the foundation consciousness and the sense organ of sight is Jambhaka. And so on until:
Meditate upon them as being of one taste.193
This states that after Vajravega has summoned the wisdom beings, one meditates that the wrathful protectors, Jambhaka, Stambhaka, Māṇaka, and Atibala, correlating respectively with the eye, body, tongue, and nose consciousnesses of the newborn, bring about the absorption, binding, delight, and one-taste union, respectively, of the wisdom and samaya beings.
At the same time, when summoning one utters jaḥ, when absorbing one utters hūḥ, when binding one utters baṃ, when delighting one utters hoṃ, and when becoming of one taste one utters the syllable hi. These are to be said forcefully.
The mudrās are vajra hook, vajra, vajra noose, vajra and bell, and vajra staff respectively.
Concerning the individual wisdom beings and samaya beings becoming of one taste, the Great Commentary explains the one-taste merging as it occurs in the mind mandala from the line beginning “Here, in the yoga of generation” until “on the central lotus.”194 The merging of the body-mandala wrathful protectors is described incidentally.
The explanation of the merging of the remaining deities of the body and speech mandalas is left uncommented on as found in the Condensed Tantra, because it is deemed “easy to understand.” Those merging processes that are actually taught in the commentary can be understood by reading them, but the one-taste process as described in the “easy to understand” sections of the Condensed Tantra will be explained very briefly.
The text from “The mandala born from speech” until “meditate also on the moon and sun on the earth mandala”195 describes the one-taste merging from the remaining speech-mandala goddesses up to the wisdom and samaya merging of the sun and moon that rise over the land surrounding the mandala. Within this, of the main mother speech yoginīs, Cāmuṇḍi196 in the east is embraced by Indra; Vaiṣṇavī in the northeast is embraced by Brahmā; Vārāhī in the south is embraced by Rudra, or Īśvara; ¡aṇmukhī in the southwest is embraced by Gaṇapati; Aindrī in the west embraced by Nairtya, or Rakṣā; Brahmāṇī in the northwest is embraced by Viṣṇu;
Rudrī, or Īśvarī, in the north is embraced by Yama; and Lakṣmī in the northeast is embraced by ¡aṇmukha. Together with their entourage deities, they all undergo the one-taste merging of samaya and wisdom beings. A similar process occurs with the main mother-and-father lunar-day deities. To the right of the east gate in the center of the lotus, Rakṣā the asura king is embraced by Rakṣī.
In the southeast Vāyu is embraced by Pracaṇḍī. To the right of the south gate, Agni is embraced by Varuṇī. In the southwest ¡aṇmukha is embraced by Lakṣmī. To the right of the western gate, Devendra197 is embraced by Vāyudevī.
In the northwest Brahmā is embraced by Vidyutī. To the right of the northern gate, Samudra, or Varuṇa, is embraced by Vārāhī. In the northeast Gaṇapati is embraced by ¡aṇmukhī. To the left of the north gate, Rudra, or Īśvara, is embraced by Gaurī. To the left of the south gate, Yama is embraced by Yamārī.
To the left of the east gate, Viṣṇu is embraced by Lakṣmī. To the left of the west gate, Yakṣa is embraced by Yakṣiṇī. Wisdom beings merge into these deities and their entourage and become of one taste. Outside the walls of the body mandala, on platforms in the four directions, are the nāgas. On the eastern platform, on air mandalas, stand Padma and Karkoṭaka.
In the south, on fire mandalas, stand Vāsuki and Śaṅkhapāla.
In the north, on water mandalas, stand Kulika and Ananta.
In the west on earth mandalas stand Takṣaka and Mahāpadma.
Similarly the fierce females are in the grounds of the cemeteries. In the eastern cemetery called Pierced lives dog-faced Śvānavaktrā.
In the southern cemetery called Blazing lives the pig-faced Śūkarāsyā. In the northern cemetery called Putrid lives the tiger-faced Vyāghravaktra. In the western cemetery called Wolf lives the wolf-faced Jambukāsyā. In the southeastern cemetery called Remainder lives the crow-faced Kākavaktrā.
In the southwestern cemetery called Unending War lives the vulture-faced Gṛidha vaktrā.
In the northwestern cemetery called Magical Food lives the hawk-faced Khagapativadanā.
In the northeastern cemetery called Death of the Foolish lives the owl-faced Ulūkavaktrā.
The nāgas are embraced by fierce females, and the fierce female mothers are embraced by nāgas.
The embracing has to involve different families, and so those of the east and west mutually embrace, as do those of the north and south, southeast and northwest, southwest and northeast.
This is the meaning of quotes from the Condensed Tantra that state:
Similarly, on the earth mandala, in families, stand Takṣaka and Mahāpadma in the cemeteries
with Śvānavaktrā and other fierce females as their wisdom consorts,
who in turn stand with Padma and the others as their method consorts. Therefore it is with other families that they are paired for the highest bliss.198
Therefore one should meditate on the nāgas and fierce female mother-and-father samaya beings as being of one taste with the wisdom beings, and the samaya moon and sun as being of one taste with the wisdom moon and sun. This is a brief explanation of text from the Condensed Tantra deemed “easy to understand.” Sealing by family The Great Commentary says:
Now “the crown” and so forth talks of the deities being sealed by their families. Here in the mandala of the supreme original buddha, on the crown, “a vajra in the manner of two vajras crossed.” Why? Because consciousness and gnosis are perfectly united.
Therefore gnosis is on consciousness and consciousness is on gnosis. On the heads of both is the mind vajra in robes and with crown protrusion, in lotus posture, with earth-touching mudrā, giving the breath of the tathāgatas.
It is rejected that the essence family is sealed by the five families. This is because it is the creator of buddhas.
Alternatively, because of the phenomena of gnosis and consciousness, the crown, in essence the five buddhas, sometimes seals. Thus it is ascertained.199 This passage has produced many differing explanations.
Some scholars say that the phrase “On the heads of both” refers to the heads of the mother-and-father main deities.
Some say it refers to Vajrasattva and Akṣobhya.
Concerning “the essence family,” some explain it as referring to the form of a monk.
Some say it refers to Vajrasattva.
Others say it means that the five families do not crown-seal themselves.
However it will be explained as follows. When the six families are explained as those of the vajra family and so forth, Amoghasiddhi is of the sword family, Ratna-sambhava is of the jewel family, Amitābha is of the lotus family, Vairocana is of the wheel family, and Vajrasattva and Akṣobhya are both of the vajra family.
Therefore the commentary to the Condensed Tantra text, “a vajra in the manner of two vajras crossed” says, “Therefore gnosis is on consciousness” and so on.
This teaches that Vajrasattva of the gnosis family and Akṣobhya of the consciousness family are similar in that they both belong to the vajra family. Therefore they are crown-sealed by each other, and the heads of both Vajrasattva and Akṣobhya are crown-sealed by mind-vajra Akṣobhya in robes with crown protrusion and so on.
The meaning of the lines beginning “It is rejected that the essence family” is that Vajrasattva is of the essence family, or gnosis-aggregate family, and he is not crown-sealed by the five families with crowns of tied-up hair, because the gnosis aggregate, or the subtle clear-light mind, is the creator of all things in samsara and nirvana and, similarly, its purification in the form of Vajrasattva is the creator of buddhas.
Concerning the line beginning “Alternatively, because of the phenomena,” in many translations “alternatively” is rendered as “however,” and in keeping with that translation, this line means that “However, because gnosis and consciousness are crown-sealed by each other, it is fitting that sometimes green Akṣobhya, who is in essence the five buddhas, crown-seals a blue Vajrasattva.” “Thus” indicates that this is an exception.
Having explained the way Vajrasattva and Akṣobhya are crown-sealed, the Great Commentary continues:
“On form is Akṣobhya,” teaches enlightened mind in its aspect of enlightened form.
“Becoming Vairocana holding a lotus” talks of the body, which expresses individual speech.
“Holder of a mighty jeweled lotus” refers to blood.
“In the crown of Amoghasiddhi the supreme jewel” teaches that from the blood arises flesh.200
This explains that the other four families are crown-sealed in the manner of the cause crown-sealing the result.
Enlightened form arises from enlightened mind, and this body, or enlightened form, expresses speech.
From water, which has the nature of Amitābha, arises blood. From blood arises flesh.
Therefore, in order, Akṣobhya seals Vairocana, Vairocana seals Amitābha, Amitābha seals Ratnasambhava, and Ratnasambhava seals Amoghasiddhi.
The Great Commentary continues: “Vairocana and the deity to the left,” or Amitābha;
Avināśa, or Ratnasambhava; his son, or Amoghasiddhi; Vaśin, or Akṣobhya; Kālāgni, or Vajrasattva: these in the nature of earth, water, fire, air, space, and gnosis, the ordinary aggregates are sealed by the pure aggregates with robes and crown protrusion.
These six have crowns of tied-up hair.201 Some just explain this passage as meaning that the six families with crowns of tied-up hair are sealed by the six families with crown protrusion and robes, but which family is sealed by which is not clear. Other scholars say that it is acceptable for the crown-sealing to be performed by any of them, because “The crown sealing is performed on the heads by the mind vajra as the emanation body in the form of a monk.
This is done on the basis of being of identical nature, because the main deity, the five families, and all the others in the mandala are of one nature with Śākyamuni.” It appears that, according to this statement, the sealer with crown protrusion and robes who seals the six families with crowns of tied-up hair is Śākyamuni.
This contradicts the teaching that those with crown protrusion and robes who perform the sealing are of the same nature as the purified aggregates, as evidenced by the line  “the ordinary aggregates are sealed by the pure aggregates with robes and crown protrusion.”
The Puṇḍarīka Transmission Sādhana states that Vairocana, Amitābha, Ratnasambhava, Amoghasiddhi, Akṣobhya, and Vajrasattva with crowns of tied-up hair are crown-sealed respectively by Vairocana and the others with crown protrusion and robes.202 If this interpretation is followed, then to say that the line “It is rejected that the essence family” means that that the five families do not crown-seal themselves would be contradictory.
Therefore the meaning of this line has to be as I have explained it above. The Great Commentary lines from “Alternatively, because of the phenomena of gnosis and consciousness” up to “In the crown of Amoghasiddhi the supreme jewel” explains who crown-seals whom in the six families.
Concerning the bodily form of those who seal and the bodily form of those who are sealed, an explanation is given in the lines that run from “The six have crowns of tied-up hair” up to “the ordinary aggregates with crowns of tied-up hair are sealed by the pure aggregates with robes and crown protrusion.” This passage teaches that the six pure aggregates or elements, symbolized by the six families with crown protrusion and robes, crown-seal the six bases of purification in the form of impure aggregates or elements, symbolized by the six families with crowns of tied-up hair.
The passage should be explained in this way. Thus, for example, Akṣobhya in the form of a monk crown-seals Vairocana in the form of one possessing a crown of tied-up hair. Concerning the crown-sealing of the remaining deities, the Great Commentary says:
The head ornaments of the remaining gods and goddesses are crowned by various jewels and by their respective families.203 Therefore those belonging to one of the six families are sealed by the six families in enjoyment-body emanation.
Furthermore, except for the śakti, black gods and goddesses who belong to a family are sealed by Amoghasiddhi, red deities by Ratnasambhava, white by Amitābha, yellow by Vairocana, and green by Akṣobhya.
The śakti and blue gods and goddesses are sealed by Vajrasattva. Blessings of body, speech, and mind The Great Commentary says:
Here the body, speech, and mind of the newborn child are blessed to become the waking state, dreams, and sleep.204
The blessing by enlightened body, speech, and mind is performed in correlation with the body, speech, and mind of the newborn child in the three states of waking, dreams, and deep sleep.
Concerning the procedure the Great Commentary says:
On the brow, throat, heart, navel, secret, and crown are oṃ, āḥ, hūḥ, hoṃ, svā, and hā. These are the stages of the blessings. As a mother washes her child, so the supreme lord is washed by the “goddesses,” or yoginīs.205 On the brow, throat, and heart center of the mother-and-father deities are oṃ, āṃ, and hūḥ respectively.
At the navel of the mother is hoṃ, at her secret area svā, and on her crown hā. This is a synopsis of the blessing procedure.
The explanation of the actual blessing starts from the next line in the Great Commentary, which begins “Here the blessing.
First one meditates that the yoginīs wash the main deity and supreme lord with vases of water. This correlates with the child being washed by its mother. Now the body, speech, and mind blessing begins. From an āḥ at the brow of both mother-and-father deities arise moon disks on which stand the syllable oṃ.
They transform into eight-spoked wheels, which in turn change into the white body-vajra deity in union with his wisdom consort. Their faces and hand implements are clearly described in the Great Commentary.
One meditates that the body vajra emerges from the brow center to produce countless replicas.
They fill the realms of space, teaching the dharma to the sentient beings to be tamed by body vajra deities, and then return to merge into a single deity that stands before the meditator.
One then makes the request, “Holder of the body vajra, grant me initiation.” Goddesses of the body family perform the actual initiation with vases of nectar.
The body-blessing initiation occurs when the visualized body vajra enters the moon disk at one’s brow and one recites the two verses beginning “Glorious holder of the body vajra.” The meaning of the first verse206 is as follows:
“Glorious indivisible gnosis held in the immutable body drop, holder of the body vajra.” This is an address to the deity.
“By meditating on the indivisibility of the body, speech, and mind vajras during the practices of the path, you have actualized the body vajra.
Bless me in the place upon the brow, grant me now the attainment of the body vajra.”207 The second verse follows the same pattern.
In the speech blessing one visualizes the letter ra at the throats of mother-and-father main deity. This changes into a sun disk, on top of which is the syllable āṃ.
That becomes a red lotus of eight petals, which in turn becomes the speech vajra, whose color, faces, hands, and hand symbols are clearly described in the Great Commentary and who is in union with his wisdom consort.
He emanates to fill the realms of space and teaches those to be tamed by speech-vajra emanations, before returning as a single deity in front of oneself.
One requests, “Holder of the vajra, grant me initiation,” and as before one visualizes that goddesses of the speech family come to bestow initiation.
The speech vajra returns to the sun mandala at the throat, and one recites the two verses beginning “Glorious holder of the speech vajra.” The meaning of the verses is “Glorious indivisible gnosis held in and arising from the immutable speech drop, holder of the speech vajra.”208  This is an address to the deity.
The remaining lines are similar to the previous verse except that “speech” is substituted for “body” and the place of blessing is the throat.
In the mind blessing one visualizes a drop at the heart of both mother and father. This becomes a dark blue Rāhu mandala on top of which is the syllable hūḥ. This transforms into a five-pointed vajra, which in turns becomes a black mind vajra in union with his wisdom consort and whose faces, hands, and implements are clearly taught in the Great Commentary.
He emanates to fill the realms of space, where the emanations teach dharma to those who are to be tamed by mind-vajra emanations, and then returns to become a single deity in front of the meditator, who requests, “Holder of the mind vajra, grant me initiation.” Goddesses of the mind family bestow initiation.
The mind blessing occurs when the mind vajra returns to the Rāhu mandala and one recites the two verses of request that begin, “Glorious holder of the mind vajra.” The meaning of the verses is “Glorious indivisible gnosis held in and arising from the immutable speech drop, holder of the mind vajra.”209 This is an address to the deity.
The remaining lines are similar to the previous verse except that “mind” is substituted for “body” and the place of blessing is the heart.
After the mind blessing one recites the mantra oṃ sarva tathāgata kāya vāka citta svabhāva ātmako haṃ.
The meaning of this mantra is “I the yogi hold the pride of being of the nature of the body, speech, and mind of all the tathāgatas.” This is because oṃ at the beginning heads the mantra;
sarva means all; kāya means body;
vāka means speech;
citta means mind;
svabhāva means nature;
ātmakaṃ means self;
ahaṃ means I.
In the mantra, ko haṃ is a product of amalgamation.210 The Kalāpasūtra says: Between the letters a it becomes u; between a and voiced letters also.211
Thus the visarga between the life-giving letter a of the letter ka and the voiced letter ha becomes the letter u.
On the letter u it becomes the letter o. Thus the life-giving a of ka becomes o. The a on the other side is erased, and k is brought to o to become ko, thereby resulting in ko haṃ.212
This has been a shared blessing by the body, speech, and mind of both mother and father.
Concerning the individual blessings from the mother, the Great Commentary says:
Similarly the letter hoḥ at the navel of the wisdom consort.213
The blessings from the wisdom consort are granted by the letter hoṃ at her navel, svā in her secret area, and ha at her crown.
The reason why there are three blessings from the father and six from the mother is mentioned in the Great Commentary:
From the fluid phenomena there are three of method.
From the blood and fluid phenomena there are six of wisdom.214 Purity meditation This is under two headings: 1.Meditating on the purity of the celestial mansion
2.Meditating on the purity of the resident deities
Mediating on the purity of the celestial mansion There are two types of celestial mansion purity. Purity as applied to the body is taught in the first summary of the Gnosis chapter and can be ascertained there. Here in the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, the purity of phenomena without obscuration is taught. When the celestial palace was described, the explanation was purely descriptive, but here the purpose is meditation, and so the meanings of that description need to be explained.
The purity of the celestial mansion is taught in order to reverse the perception that the deities and the celestial mansion are separate entities, like the ordinary world and its inhabitants.
The purity of the deities is taught in order to reverse the perception that because the main deities, their entourage — males and females and so on — have different forms, they must be different beings. Therefore here meditation is important. On the purity of the celestial mansion, the Great Commentary quotes from the Root Tantra:
Mind, speech, and body mandalas of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha;
four vajra lines of the four places of Brahmā;
the perfect squares of the four foundations of mindfulness;
twelve gates of the twelve limbs;
similarly the beautiful portals of the twelve levels;
cremation grounds of the eight directions of the eight limbs of the noble path;
pillars of the sixteen kinds of emptiness; the walls of the elements;
the eight porch walls of the eight freedoms;
the facing and side-door walls of the eight material qualities
divided among mind, speech, and body;
five pure colors of the five aggregates of morality, etc.;
three surrounding walls of the three vehicles,
five surrounding walls of the forces of faith and so on,
five surrounding walls of the powers of faith and so on,
of the mandalas of mind, speech, and body;
mandala terraces of concentrations and dhāraṇī;
beautiful jeweled friezes of the ten perfections completed;
double and single crystal garlands of the eighteen exclusive dharmas;
the bagulī of the powers;
the kramaśīraṣa of the virtues,
filled with the chimes of freedoms such as emptiness,
filled with victory banners of magical power concentrations,
shining with mirrors of the eradications;
the moving yaktail fans of the limbs of enlightenment;
decorated by the garlands of the nine branches;
adorned by the corner crossed vajras of the four ways of gathering;
decorated by the jewels of the four truths
on the gates and porch walls;
encircled constantly by the five great circles of the fivefold clairvoyance;
surrounded by the vajra garland of omniscient enlightenment;
the iron fence of the one bliss;
similarly the vajra flames of gnosis;
the constant moon and sun of wisdom and method;
the dharma wheel, great vase, great drum,
and bodhi tree mind of mind, speech, body, and purity;
likewise the wish-fulfilling jewel, and so on.
This is the glorious Kālacakra dharmadhātu.215
The Three Jewels of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha are the mind, speech, and body mandalas respectively.
The four places of Brahmā,216 immeasurable love, and so on are the four vajra gridlines.
The four pure forms of the four foundations of mindfulness217 of body, feelings, mind, and phenomena are the perfect squares of the gridlines.
The cessation of the twelve limbs of dependent origination, ignorance, and so on are the twelve gates of the mind, speech, and body mandalas.
The twelve ārya levels are the twelve portals.
The pure forms of the eight limbs of the noble path, right view, and so on are the eight cremation grounds of the eight directions.
The pure forms of the sixteen kinds of emptiness, such as inner and outer emptiness and so on, are the sixteen black inner pillars. The five pure elements are represented by the complete enclosure of the celestial palace above, below, outside, and inside.
The pure forms of the eight freedoms, such as regarding form as form and so on,218 are the eight protective porch walls on each of the mind, speech, and body mandalas.
The eight material qualities devoid of obscuration, which are the pure forms of earth, water, fire, air, smell, form, taste, and touch, are the eight facing door walls of the three mandalas.
The pure forms of the three sun qualities of activity, darkness, and lightness,219 and the five moon qualities of sound, smell, taste, touch, and form, are the eight side-door walls of the three mandalas.
The five pure aggregates of morality, meditative concentration, wisdom, freedom, and the gnosis of freedom are the five colors.
The three pure vehicles of Hearer, Solitary Realizer, and Mahayana are the three surrounding walls of the mind mandala.
The pure forms of the five forces of faith, effort, memory, meditative concentration, and wisdom are the five surrounding walls of the speech mandala.
The pure forms of the five powers of faith, effort, memory, meditative concentration, and wisdom are the five surrounding walls of the body mandala.
These are the pure forms of the walls of the mind, speech, and body mandalas.
The four pure meditative concentrations — the warrior, treasury of space, vajralike, and lion pose — plus the four pure meditative retentions, or dhāraṇī, of words, meanings, mantra, and forbearance are the terraces on the three mandalas.
The ten pure perfections are the jeweled friezes studded and beautifully decorated with precious stones.
The eighteen pure and exclusive qualities of a buddha are represented by the single and double hanging jeweled net garlands. The ten pure powers:
namely, power over life, karma, necessities, wishes, prayers, dharma, mind, birth, magical creation, and gnosis, are the phakulī,220 or ornamented guttering.
The ten pure virtues are the kramaśīraṣa, or parapets.221 The pure forms of the four freedoms, namely, emptiness, no sign, no wish, and no activity, are the all-pervading chimes of bells.
The pure forms of the four magical-power meditative concentrations, namely, aspiration, effort, mind, and investigation, are the profusion of victory banners.
The four perfect eradications — namely, not developing those nonvirtues as yet undeveloped, eradicating those already developed, developing virtues not yet developed, and increasing those already developed — when purified are the decorative and shining mirrors.
The purification of the seven limbs of enlightenment, namely, memory, analysis, effort, joy, pliancy, meditative concentration, and equanimity, are the yaktail fans.
The pure gnosis that produces the nine branches of scripture222 — namely, sutras, occasional-verse teachings, specific prophecy, verse teachings, person-nonspecific teachings, person-specific teachings, stories, Buddha’s previous lives, and vast teachings — are the decorative profusion of flower garlands.
The purified forms of the four ways of gathering disciples, namely, giving, kind words, according with disciples’ behavior, and according with disciples’ wishes, are the decorative crossed vajras in the corners of the celestial mansion.
The purified forms of the four truths of suffering, source, path, and cessation are the four jewels that decorate the gates and porch walls.
The purified forms of the fivefold clairvoyance, namely, celestial sight, celestial hearing, knowing the minds of others, remembering past lives, and knowledge of magical powers, are the five great surrounding circles, such as the earth circle and so on.
The pure omniscient enlightenment is the outer encirclement by the vajra garland.
The vajra-garlanded iron fence is in essence the uncontaminated great bliss.
Similarly the vajra flames are in essence the five kinds of gnosis.
The pure form of wisdom is the moon constantly shining in the northeast, and the pure form of method is the sun constantly shining in the southwest.
The pure forms of the mind, speech, body, and gnosis vajras are respectively the wheel of dharma, the great vase, the great drum, and the Bodhi tree that stand on ledges within the body mandala. The pure forms of the four vajras are also the wish-fulfilling jewel, wish-fulfilling tree, dharma gong, and dharma conch that stand within the great bliss mandala.
Therefore this is a meditation to reveal these various aspects of the base mandala as the definitive and pure dharmadhātu mandala of glorious Kālacakra, endowed to perfection with every possible obscuration-free excellence. Meditating on the purity of the resident deities This is in two sections: 1.Channel purity 2.Aggregate and sphere purity
Channel purity
This is taught in verse 101 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter of the Condensed Tantra, from the line beginning “The vases and the eight, such as Dhūmā, are the dharma wheel at the heart” until “the finger joints.”223 This is explained as follows.
The purified forms of the eight channel petals of the heart are the eight vases and the eight śakti.
The purified forms of the sixteen channel petals at the brow are the four male tathāgatas with consorts and the four female tathāgatas with consorts.
The purified forms of the four channel petals at the crown are the dharma conch, the jewel, the dharma gong, and the wish-fulfilling tree.
The purified forms of the thirty-two channel petals of the throat are the six male bodhisattvas with consorts, the six female bodhisattvas with consorts, and the four wrathful protectors with consorts.
The purified forms of the sixty-four channel petals of the navel are the sixty-four goddesses, such as Bhīma and so on, of the speech mandala.
The purified forms of the thirty-two channel petals of the secret area are the eight main goddesses, Cāmuṇḍi and so on, of the speech mandala and the eight offering goddesses, Lāsyā and so on, each in method and wisdom aspect to make thirty-two.
The purified forms of the 360 channel petals arrived at by totaling the thirty petals on each of the twelve cakras of the twelve major arms and leg joints, are the 360 lunar-day deities.
The purified forms of the two sets of thirty cakras on the finger and toe joints plus the two sets of two pervading channels are the sixteen figures of the eight nāgas and eight fierce females divided up twice into method and wisdom to make two sets of thirty-two. Aggregate and sphere purity
This is taught in the second half of verse 102 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter of the Condensed Tantra, from the line beginning “Time in its pure form is the vajra holder” up to “The body hairs are the host of spirits in the cemeteries.”224 This is explained as follows.
External time is the sun moving through the twelve houses, while internal time is the cause- and-effect phenomena of the twelve links of dependent origination.
In their purified form these become the vajra holder Kālacakra, the main deity of the mandala.
The way the twelve links of dependent origination are causes and effects is explained by the Great Commentary:
Internally the twelve links of the cycles of houses, Capricorn and so forth, are of the nature of cause and effect.
Five are causes, seven are effects.
The causes have the nature of afflictions and karma.
The effects have the nature of suffering. This is taught in the Realms chapter.225
Thus ignorance, compositional karma, grasping, taking, and becoming are causes.
Consciousness, name and form, the six sources, contact, feeling, birth, and aging and death are all effects.
The way that one circles in samsara within these causes and effects is as follows. Affliction and karma drive the cycle of samsara.
From the twelve links, ignorance, grasping, and taking are afflictions, while compositional karma and becoming are karma.
The link of becoming is the point when the seeds of karma gain in strength to develop the capacity to create a new birth and, therefore, is not actually karma but is merely labeled as such.
The way these effects are produced from these causes is as follows.
Because of ignorance, virtuous and nonvirtuous compositional karma is accumulated.
This compositional karma, which is capable of creating the links from consciousness to feeling through the process of impelling,226 plants seeds on the mindstream. These seeds, nourished by the link of grasping and then by the link of taking, both of which have the nature of attachment, grow in strength and form the link of becoming, which has the capacity to create a future birth.
From the link of becoming comes the link of consciousness that has just linked to a mother’s womb.
From consciousness arises name and form, the six sources, contact, and feeling, all arising from preceding links.
The moment of the consciousness linking to a mother’s womb is known as birth, and the process of moving from name and form to feeling is labeled aging.
Death is posited as the cessation of life. The above is the thinking of the tantra and commentary and therefore is at one with the thinking of Master Nāgārjuna when he says in his Verses on the Essence of Dependent Origination: Two come from three,
seven come from two,
and three come from seven; this wheel of existence
turns again and again.227 During the deity emanations of the sovereign-mandala deity, when a correlation is made with the ordinary base, the passage beginning “Ignorance, compositional karma, and consciousness” teaches that the length of time in the womb is applied to the links of dependent origination, in which the names of the links are given to the months of pregnancy.
The reason for this is as follows. As previously explained, the month of conception, regardless of what the actual month might be, is known as the month of Capricorn.
Seven months on from then, the winds are created in the navel channel petals, and therefore that month is known as the month of Cancer.
Because of this the month of conception is known as the month of ignorance, and the following months of pregnancy are named compositional karma, consciousness, and so on.
The reason why Capricorn is the month of ignorance is that when the twelve links of dependent origination and the twelve zodiacal months are assigned to each other as an internal and external correlation, the first of the twelve links and the first zodiacal month of pregnancy have to be assigned to each other,  and in this part of the generation stage, the Great Commentary comments, “Internally, the zodiac cycle of Capricorn and so on are the twelve links,” while in verse 112 of the Realms chapter of the Condensed Tantra it says, “Ignorance is in the month of Puṣya when the sun enters Capricorn.”228
The cessation of the twelve links of dependent origination is Viśvamātā. The Great Commentary states: Similarly the cessation of the twelve links is the pure Prajñā.229
The purified forms of the eight channels at the heart, which are the supports for the equalizing wind and so on, are the eight śakti, Dhūmā and so forth.
The purified forms of the two parts of the central channel, avadhūtī above and śaṅkhinī below, are the two other śakti, Jñānapāramitā of the gnosis element, symbolized by the visarga, and Prajñāpāramitā of the space element, symbolized by the drop.
The ending of pride and the three poisons is Rudra under the left foot.
The ending of the four kinds of māras, namely mental afflictions, lord of death, the aggregates, and Devaputra, is Māra under the right foot.
The ending of obstructions to the body is the conch.
The ending of obstructions to speech is the gong. The ending of obstructions to mind is the jewel.
The ending of obstructions to gnosis is the wish-fulfilling tree.
The cessation of the right and left bone marrow is represented by the two vases in the east. Assigning left and right to the following also, the cessation of blood is symbolized by the two vases of the south.
The nonemission of urine is illustrated by the two vases of the north, and the nonemission of excrement by the two vases of the west.
The nonemission of seminal fluid is illustrated by the upper vase, the nonemission of menstrual blood by the lower.
Eight vases are actually placed in the mandala, while the jaya and vijaya vases pervade them all. The purification and freedom from obscuration of the aggregates of compositional factors, feelings, recognition, form, and consciousness are Amoghasiddhi, Ratnasambhava, Amitābha, Vairocana, and Akṣobhya respectively.
The purified and obscuration-free elements of gnosis, space, air, fire, water, and earth are Viśvamātā, Vajradhātvīśvarī, Tārā, Pāṇḍarā, Māmakī, and Locanā respectively.
The purification and freedom from obscuration of the ear, nose, eyes, tongue, body, and mind  are Vajrapāṇi, Khagarbha, Kṣitigarbha, Lokeśvara, Viṣkambhī, and Samantabhadra respectively.
The purified sources of sound, smell, taste, form, touch, and phenomena are Śabdavajrā, Gandhavajrā, Rasavajrā, Rūpavajrā, Viśvamātā, and Dharmadhātuvajrā respectively. The purified forms of the powers of faith, effort, memory, concentration, and wisdom are the wrathful protectors Uṣṇīṣa, Vighnantaka, Prajñā taka, Padmantaka, and Yamāntaka respectively.
The purified forms of the organs of the female organ, speech, arms, legs, and anus are Sumbha, Nīla daṇḍa, Takkirāja, Acala, and Mahābala respectively.
The purified forms of the organ faculties are the wrathful goddesses, Raudrākṣī and so forth.
The purified forms of the eight periods are the eight main goddesses of the speech mandala, Cāmuṇḍi and so forth.
The purified forms of the sixty channel petals carrying the winds of the sixty hours of the twelve lagna or ascendants of one day, plus the four empty channels to make up the sixty-four channel petals of the navel or emanation cakra, are Bhīma and so on, the sixty-four goddesses of the speech mandala.
The purified and obscuration-free forms of the twelve months of Caitra and so on are the twelve main lunar-day deities — Nairtya, Vāyu, Agni, Śaṇmukha, Samudra, Gaṇapati, Śakra, Brahmā, Rudra, Yakṣa, Viṣṇu, and Yama.
The purified forms of the 360 breaths of one hour and the 360 days of one year are the 336 entourage deities of the lunar-day deities plus the twelve consorts of the lunar-day deities and the twelve goddesses of the mind mandala, Lāsyā and so forth.
The pure forms of the thirty-two channel petals of the secret area are the eight nāgas and eight fierce females, each in method and wisdom aspect, to make thirty-two.
In terms of their qualities, the purified and unobstructed forms of bodily actions, such as digging in the earth, are the thirty-six desire goddesses and the thirty-six nondesire goddesses.
Hairs in their purified forms are the siddhas.
The purified forms of the thirty-five million pores are the thirty-five million elementals in the cemeteries.
In the purity of the base mandalas and dependent deities as explained here, the purified and untainted forms of the aggregates and so on appear in the forms of these mandalas and deities. On this point, there are those phenomena that actually exist as the base mandalas and dependent deities and those that, while not actually existing that way, are meditated on as being so.
The first type is illustrated by Śākyamuni in the form of the Kālacakra, lord of the mandala, manifesting the body, speech, and mind mandalas of the Kālacakra mandala.
For the second type, the generation-stage meditator dwells in the pride of being Kālacakra, lord of the mandala, visualizing and meditating upon the bases of purification, such as the aggregates, channels, and so forth, appearing as the pure and untainted phenomena of the base mandalas and dependent deities. This is the meaning of the meditation upon the purity of the base mandalas and dependent deities.
Therefore, when the Great Commentary says, “With the cessation of the elements, the pure other elements arise”230 and “The other forms and so forth, the other eyes and so forth,”231 the term other in this context must refer to the aspects of the base mandalas and dependent deities that appear to the mind of the generation-stage practitioner.
In particular the Great Commentary says:
When conventional phenomena have ceased, there are other compositional factors and so forth.
Therefore the pure compositional factors are Amoghasiddhi, the end of obscuration to compositional factors.232 “Other compositional factors” of this passage indicates the generation-stage deity that the aggregate of compositional factors is to be visualized as.
The phrase “and so forth” refers to “other feelings” and “other recognition,” which indicate the generation-stage deities that the aggregates of feeling and recognition are to be visualized as.
The reason why this has to be the explanation of the term other is stated in the part of the quote beginning “Therefore the pure compositional factors are Amoghasiddhi.” The Amoghasiddhi mentioned here must be the generation-stage deity Amoghasiddhi, because this part of the tantra and commentary deals with the purity meditation of the generation stage.
This reasoning can be applied to the other phenomena of the purity meditation also.
Furthermore the Great Commentary, on the forty-seventh verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
Here the emanation and withdrawal of the world-realm outer, the bodily inner, and imputed other mandalas.233 The “other” mandalas mentioned here clearly refer to the base mandalas and dependent deities imputed or mentally conceived during the generation stage.
Because of these reasons, every instance of the term “other” in the Kālacakra tantra and commentary should not be understood as referring to a permanent and unchanging tathāgata essence.234 The Mind Vajra The branch of mind-vajra accomplishment, a meditation on drop yoga correlating with the expansion of the drop
This has two outlines: 1.A brief description of the assertions of others and examination of their validity 2.Our own assertions
A brief description of the assertions of others and examination of their validity
Some scholars  assert the subtle and drop yogas as taught here to be both generation-stage and completion-stage meditations. They maintain that the generation stage involves relying upon an activity mudrā consort to move the drop to the jewel and then to draw it up by the power of the winds. This “waterwheel” descent and ascent is practiced again and again until the worldly innate bliss becomes stable.
This, they maintain, is the drop yoga of the generation stage, while drop yoga and subtle yoga using a mahāmudrā consort are yogas of the completion stage.
They also explain the Root Tantra line “A qualified consort aged sixteen” as teaching the six-branched yoga.
It is not correct to say that the practice of relying on an activity mudrā consort to move the drop down to the jewel and then through the force of the winds to draw it up again to produce innate bliss is a generation-stage meditation, because the development of such an innate bliss requires the ability through yoga to move the winds into the central channel, and the innate bliss produced from the winds entering the central channel cannot be a generation-stage practice.
This is because a method for moving the winds into the central channel is not taught in the generation stage,  and the yoga in which the bodhicitta element ascends and descends again and again like a waterwheel using the power of the winds must be within the completion stage.
Furthermore it is hard to understand how the line “A qualified consort aged sixteen”236 teaches the six-branched yoga.
The Great Commentary says: In the generation stages the completion of the enlightened body is within the sovereign mandala.
The completion of enlightened speech is within the sovereign activities, because the action faculties engage in activity.
The completion of the drops of bodhicitta is within the drop yoga.
Bliss arising from the movement of the fluid is within the subtle yoga.237 This passage explains that the subtle and drop yogas as taught here are generation-stage practices, and the Root Tantra line “A qualified consort aged sixteen”238 is quoted here as scriptural authority for this way of meditating on the subtle and drop yoga at this time. Our own assertions This is under two headings: 1.Correlation with bases of purification
2.An explanation of the practice based upon Root Tantra quotes
Correlation with bases of purification
When a child reaches the age of sixteen, the power of his white element is complete. Seeking the bliss that comes from emission of the drop, he takes a bride and leads her by the hand and so forth. In correlation with this the vajra master gives a wisdom mudrā consort to the student during the initiation. Yogis meditating on the subtle and drop yogas will rely upon an activity or wisdom mudrā consort as appropriate. In normal existence, from the age of sixteen onward, a man sits in union with a mudrā, and the common caṇḍālī fire blazes from the secret area.
The drop melts and gradually descends from the crown to the tip of the organ, thereby increasing the bliss. In correlation with this the bodhicitta element descends from the crown to the tip of the vajra through reliance on one of the two types of mudrās and produces the four joys, which are applied to meditation upon emptiness. This is drop yoga meditation. An explanation of the practice based upon Root Tantra quotes The teachings from the tantra and commentary on the meditations of the subtle and drop yogas of the generation stage in this part of the text are intended for the primary disciples of the tantra. These are jewellike persons destined in one life to actualize the state of Vajradhara. They complete the deity yoga of the coarse generation stage and then meditate on the subtle and drop yogas. The explanation from the tantra, therefore, is given on this basis.
Such a person enters the practice of drop yoga by relying upon one of the two types of consort. If he uses an activity consort, the Root Tantra says:
A qualified consort aged sixteen,
adorned with youth and beauty;
teach her well, then initiate and begin the practice.239 A mudrā consort should be sought.
She should have all the right characteristics of youth and beauty and be between the ages of twelve and twenty, as indicated by the phrase “aged sixteen.” She should be taught thoroughly the fundamental points of practice, receive initiation, be given tantric vows, and be instructed in the deity-yoga meditation.
Then the practice of drop yoga can begin.
What is the procedure of practice?
Body, speech, mind, and desire,
placed at the brow and so forth,
svā, hā, at the secret and crown.240
Oneself is clearly visualized as main-deity Kālacakra, and the activity consort or wisdom consort as Viśvamātā.
At the brow, heart, throat, and navel of both mother and father are placed the oṃ body vajra, the āḥ speech vajra, the hūḥ mind vajra, and the hoṃ gnosis vajra.
The syllable svā is placed in the secret area and hā at the crown.
Next is the purification of the secret space:
Then the lotus is purified.241 This is an introduction. The next lines teach the actual purification:
From the syllable āṃ, an eight-petal lotus;
by the syllable hūḥ, it is with vajra;
the cause of movement of the wisdom lotus with vajra,
one’s vajra by the syllable hūḥ
visualized with five points;
in its center an eight-petal lotus conceived with the syllable āṃ.242
From the nonapprehension of the secret area of the consort arises the letter āṃ. This becomes a lotus of eight petals.
Its center is “with vajra,” which means marked with a vajra that arises from or “by the syllable hūḥ.” Then “by the syllable hūḥ” or from a hūḥ within the nonapprehension of one’s secret area while clearly visualizing oneself as the main deity, a vajra “visualized with five points,” which is “the cause of movement of the wisdom lotus with vajra.”  In the center of this vajra is an eight-petal lotus “conceived with the syllable āṃ,” meaning visualized as arising from the syllable āṃ.
That is the purification of the secret organs.
Now the practice: With the pride of vajra holder,
the vajra with lotus enters the lotus.
With liṅgam placed into the bhaga,
the yogi performs hūḥ phaṭ; the bodhicitta is not emitted.243 One’s own secret-area five-pointed vajra marked with a lotus enters the consort’s lotus. Within that state the yogi holds the pride of being the vajra holder main-deity Kālacakra, he utters the syllables hūḥ phaṭ, and dwells within the activity of union arising from placing the father’s liṅgam into the mother’s bhaga.
This brings the elemental bodhicitta drop down to the tip of the jewel, where it is not to be emitted.
The way the bodhicitta travels down from the crown to the tip of the jewel during this union and how the four joys are created from that process is taught in the next lines:
At the navel the caṇḍālī fire blazes,
the five tathāgatas are burnt,
Locanā, eyes, etc., are burnt,
the haṃ moon syllable falls
with the characteristics of nectar fluid,
in the form of a drop it descends. This is drop yoga.244 These lines can be explained in accord with the Condensed Tantra and commentary. When meditating on the coarse generation stage, seventy-two channel petals, consisting of the twelve zodiac channel petals of the navel cakra and the sixty channel petals that carry the sixty mandala winds, are purified and blessed by meditation upon seventy-two yoginīs of the speech mandala. From these and from mother and father in union, the caṇḍālī fire blazes, and at the emanation navel cakra, the mandala winds of the five tathāgatas, Vairocana and so forth, on the left, the five mandala winds of Locanā and so forth on the right, the five sense organs of the eyes and so forth, the five objects of form and so forth, are all “burnt,”  meaning that they are temporarily halted from performing their individual functions.
The moon bodhicitta arises from the syllable haṃ at the crown and falls.
The nectar fluid in the form of a drop descends from the crown to the tip of the jewel.
It descends from the crown to the throat to produce joy. Falling from the throat to the heart, it produces supreme joy. Falling from the heart to the navel, it produces special joy. Falling from the navel to the secret area or tip of the jewel, it produces innate joy.
These four joys of descent are applied to emptiness to create bliss-and-emptiness yoga. This is the drop yoga of the generation stage.
This description accords with the Great Commentary beginning from the line, “The nine of the navel cakra” until “at the throat the gnosis drop,”245 which is commentary on the above root text passage.
Within that commentary are the lines:
“The fire of the caṇḍālī gnosis blazes up” refers to conventional gnosis, desire, and the fire is the fire of desire.
When that fire of desire blazes, Vairocana and the others of the five mandalas of the left at the emanation navel wheel…246 These and following lines teach that ten airs are burnt at the navel and that they are burnt by the fire of desire. Therefore this caṇḍālī fire is the caṇḍālī of the secret area.
Also the line “conventional gnosis, desire, and the fire is the fire of desire” teaches that this fire of desire is fanned by the desire for the mudrā consort, and therefore this fire is of the ordinary external caṇḍālī.
Another reason why this must be so is that if the caṇḍālī that melts the bodhicitta were the inner caṇḍālī of the śaṅkhinī channel, the four joys at this juncture would have to be the four joys of the bodhicitta descending within the central channel, and those four joys are only found in completion-stage practice and not in the generation stage. The Gnosis Vajra The branch of gnosis-vajra great accomplishment:
A meditation on the subtle yoga correlating with the completion of bliss at the age of sixteen
Sixteen, half and half247 holding the drop,
partless beyond parts,
held at the peak of the four meditative absorptions.248
This is the subtle yoga.249 The meaning of these Root Tantra lines is explained by the Great Commentary in the lines beginning:
“Dwelling in the pure wisdom250 the bodhicitta again,” means, as it arrives so it returns.251
The commentary states that the drop descends to the tip of the jewel and travels back up again in the manner of its descent. Traveling from the secret area to the navel as a similar-to-cause result, the meditative absorption of joy is experienced.
Traveling from the navel to the heart as a ripening result, the meditative absorption of supreme joy is experienced. Traveling from the heart to the throat as a personally created result, the meditative absorption of special joy is experienced. Traveling from the throat to the brow as an eradication result, the meditative absorption of innate joy is experienced. The four joys are mixed with emptiness, and the resulting bliss-and-emptiness yoga is the “subtle yoga great accomplishment.”
The root text from “A wisdom consort aged sixteen” until “This is the subtle yoga” teaches mainly the generation-stage subtle and drop yogas.252 The lines from “moving up, similar to the cause, etc.” up to “yoga, meditative absorptions, and so on”253 teach the completion stage.
On this point, some people, imagining it to be the position of the Puṇḍarīka Transmission Sādhana, say:
The drop-yoga simulation practice of the generation-stage practitioner can be understood from the actual teaching of the completion-stage drop yoga found in the lines beginning “At the navel the caṇḍālī fire blazes.”254
Such statements contradict the Puṇḍarīka Transmission Sādhana.
A passage of the Sādhana that runs from “Urged by the downwardly expelling wind of the caṇḍālī” to “The moonlike melted drop form arrives at the throat from the crown to create joy”255  comments on the root text from “At the navel the caṇḍālī fire blazes” until “in the form of a drop, it descends,” in accord with its the literal meaning.
After that it goes on to say: Even during the generation stage the caṇḍālī blazes, causing the element to actually melt.
From this arises the generation-stage four joys applied to emptiness to produce a true bliss and emptiness.
This causes the element mandalas and the entire three realms to arise vividly before the mind as the sport of bliss and emptiness in the form of the deities and mandalas.256 This is stated in the Sādhana, and the above assertion, therefore, would contradict it.257
The reason why the lines beginning “At the navel the caṇḍālī fire blazes” express such a literal meaning during the subtle and drop yoga practices of the generation stage is as follows.
When the primary and jewellike disciple of the tantra and commentary has completed the coarse generation stage, whatever he visualizes will vividly appear as if it were the actual object. Divine pride will transfer to wherever it is placed, the mind will not wander from whatever object it is placed upon, and will remain with a real or contrived peaceful abiding.
In such circumstances the activity mudrā consort is visualized as Viśvamātā.
If a wisdom mudrā consort is used, she is visualized as an actual person, real enough to touch.
The visualized sexual union also appears as real, and the bodhicitta is able to travel from the crown to the tip of the jewel.
With a vivid meditation of the syllable phaṭ at the opening of the jewel, the bodhicitta emission is stopped. With a clear and firm visualization of the stopped bodhicitta being drawn upward, the meditator is able to draw it back to the crown. These particular subtle and drop yogas are special ripening practices that develop into an actual completion stage in which the special caṇḍālī fire inside the central channel stops the winds of the left and right channels and is itself fanned by the winds that enter the central channel. The bodhi citta arisen from the syllable haṃ at the crown moves through the central channel to create the four or sixteen joys of descent and ascent.
With this in mind the Great Commentary says: It is taught that the undeveloped accomplish that bliss through the activity mudrā consort. The middling practitioner relies upon a wisdom consort.
The supreme yogi uses a mahāmudrā consort.258
Therefore, having explained the kinds of mudrā consort that can induce the four joys of generation-stage subtle and drop yogas, the commentary says “the undeveloped accomplish that bliss through the activity mudrā consort.
The middling practitioner relies upon a wisdom consort.” Immediately after this line, it says, “The supreme yogi uses a mahāmudrā consort,” thereby teaching the exclusive mahāmudrā consort that induces completion-stage supreme unchanging bliss.
In the Root Tantra also, immediately after the line “This is the subtle yoga,” the texts talks of the completion stage.
If this yogi uses an activity mudrā and wisdom mudrā to bring the bodhicitta to the tip of the jewel for the four joys of descent and then to draw it up to the crown for the four joys of stable ascent, what is the meaning of the following lines from the Great Commentary?
The activity mudrā is she who grants the falling bliss.
The wisdom mudrā is she who grants the moving bliss.259 Activity mudrā here refers to the power of a mudrā consort lacking skillful means who grants the bliss of emission. A wisdom mudrā merely grants the bliss of the bodhicitta element moving throughout the parts of the body. Therefore there is no contradiction here.
Those who have not completed the coarse generation stage do not have the abilities of those who have, and they should practice by way of simulation. Mantra Recitation
After the meditations of the subtle yoga come the mantra recitations, offerings, tasting the nectar, and the requests to return. These can be learned from the Puṇḍarīka Transmission Sādhana among others. Here I will explain a little about mantra repetition. This has three outlines :
1.The need to become skilled in friends and enemies in mantra practice 2.The way to calculate friends and enemies within letters 3.The way to recite mantras armed with the knowledge of friends and enemies
The need to become skilled in friends and enemies in mantra practice The Great Commentary, on verse 168 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says: It is the same with the letters of the name of the practice.
If the first letter of the name of the practitioner is an enemy, the practitioner will die. If it is neutral, he will remain with affliction.260 If it is a friend, he will become the deity.
An enemy vowel brings death. An enemy consonant brings illness.261 This means that if the vowel of the first letter of the name of the deity of practice and the vowel of the first letter of the name of the practitioner are enemies, there is the danger that the practitioner will die. If the two first consonants of practitioner and deity are enemies, there will be a risk of illness.
If the first letters of the names of deity and practitioner are friends, regardless of whether they are vowels or consonants, the practitioner will become the deity of that practice. If the first two letters of the names are neither enemies nor friends but of a neutral relationship, neither advantage nor disadvantage will occur.
Therefore one should know about friends and enemies within letters. The way to calculate friends and enemies within letters This is under two headings:
1.How the letters of the five elements become friends and enemies 2.Recognizing the elements of the different letters How the letters of the five elements become friends and enemies
The Great Commentary says:
All air letters are enemies of water letters. The vowels are of the vowels, and the consonants are of the consonants.
Likewise water letters are enemies of fire letters, as fire letters are of earth letters, and earth letters of air letters.
Space letters are friends of all, and all letters are friends of space letters.
Likewise the friend of earth is water. The friend of fire is air, and the friend of air is fire. The friend of water is earth. These are the classes of friends.
The neutral of air is water, the neutral of fire is earth, the neutral of water is fire, and the neutral of earth is air.262
When these are put in an abbreviated verse form:
The enemy of water is air, earth the enemy of air,
the enemy of earth is fire, water the enemy of fire,
space is the friend of all,
all are friends of space, earth and water are mutual friends, fire and space are mutual friends,
the neutral of air is water,
the neutral of fire is earth,
the neutral of water is fire,
the neutral of earth is air.263 These are the ways in which the letters of the five elements become friends, enemies, or neutrals.
The calculation of friend enemy and neutral should be done vowel to vowel and consonant to consonant.
This is taught by the lines “The vowels are of the vowels and the consonants are of the consonants.”
Recognizing the elements of the different letters
The vowels ā and a, the five consonants of the ka group, the letter ha, and the thka are all guttural and of the element of space.
The Root Tantra, quoted in the Great Commentary, says: a, ku,264 ha, thka, from the throat,
whether vowels or consonants,
are of emptiness and are constant friends of air and so forth.265
Likewise ī and i, the guṇa vowel e, and the vṛiddhi vowel ai, the five letters of the ca group, the letter ya, and the letter śa are all palatal and are of the air element. The Root Tantra says:
i, cu, ya, śa arise from the palate;
these vowels and consonants,
arising from the element of air,
are enemies of those arising from water.266
The vowels ṛ
and ṛī, the guṇa letter ar, the vṛiddhi letter ār, the five letters of the ṭa group, and the letters ra and ṣa are all produced from the crown267 and are of the element of fire.
The Root Tantra says: ṛ, ṭu, ra, ṣa are born from the crown;
these vowels and consonants,
arising from the element of fire, are enemies of those born from earth.268
The vowels u and ū, the guṇa and vṛiddhi letters o and au, the five letters of the pa group, the letter wa and kpa are all labial and are of the water element.
The Root Tantra says: u, pu, wa, kpa269 are produced from lips;
these vowels and consonants,
arising from the water element,
are enemies of those from fire.270
The vowels ḷ and ḷī, the five letters of the ta group, the guṇa and the vṛiddhi letters al and āl, the letter la, and the letter sa are all dental and are of the earth element. The Root Tantra says:
ḷ, tu, la, sa are produced from the teeth;
these vowels and consonants,
arising from the element of earth,
are the enemies of those of air. Constantly the friend of air is fire,
the neutral water has no power,
so the friend of fire is air.
Because the neutral earth has no power,
the friend of water is earth.
Because the neutral fire has no power,
the friend of earth is water,
and the neutral is air. These passages from the Root Tantra quoted in the Great Commentary explain this subject clearly.
The description of the ka group as space, the ca group as air, the ṭa group as fire, the pa group as water, and the ta group as earth, is made on the basis of the major elements.
The syllables ku, cu, and so forth, as presented in the Root Tantra, represent the five letters in their respective groups.
This can be understood by the line “u includes the group.”
Moreover one has to know the consonant friends and enemies of the minor elements also and be able to calculate the friend-enemy relationship on the basis of the first letters of the name of the practitioner and the deity of practice.
The Root Tantra quoted in the Great Commentary says:
The five consonants
of earth and so forth of the letters ka, etc., of one group,
should be known for mantra practice.272 Therefore, in mantra practice, calculations should be made for the minor elements also.
What are the letters for the minor elements, and how can their enemy-friend relationships be calculated? The Root Tantra says:
ṅa, ña, ṇa, and ma
are the friends of those born from air and so forth.273 The five letters ṅa, ña, ṇa, and ma belong to the space element of the five minor elements and are friends of all the letters of the remaining elements, air and so forth, regardless of whether they belong to the same group.
Similarly the remaining letters are friends of these five.
Likewise:
gha, jha, ḍha, bha, dha
are enemies of the water produced. ga, ja, ḍa, ba, da
are enemies of the earth produced.
kha, cha, ṭha, pha, tha are enemies of the fire produced. ka, ca, ṭa, pa, ta
are enemies of the air produced. This applies to the letter at the head of the mantra and the letter of the practitioner, whether of one’s group or another.274 Therefore the five letters gha, jha, ḍha, bha, and dha are of the air element of the minor elements and are enemies of those of the water element, whether or not they are from the same group.
The letters ga, ja, ḍa, ba, and da are of the fire element and are enemies of those of the earth element. The letters kha, cha, ṭha, pha, and tha are of the water element and are enemies of the fire element. The letters ka, ca, ṭa, pa, and ta are of the earth element and are enemies of the air element.
Friends and neutrals can be worked out from the elements by following the process used in the major elements. The way to recite mantras armed with the knowledge of friends and enemies This has two outlines: 1.The mantras to be recited
2.The way they are to be recited The mantras to be recited Leaving aside the oṃ at the beginning and the svāhā, for example, at the end of the mantra, the first letter of a deity’s name mantra is the mind-vajra mantra. The whole of the name mantra is the speech-vajra mantra.
Except for the branch mantras, other mantra letters added onto the name mantra are body-vajra mantras.
Branch mantras are chain mantras.
The deity mantras are examples.
This procedure can be applied to all animate and inanimate phenomena. The Great Commentary, on verse 167 of the Condensed Tantra, says:
Now the text speaks of mantras. “The first name” and so on refers to the first letter of the name of whatever moving or nonmoving phenomenon found in these three worlds.
“That becomes the mind vajra, lord of men, of the gods and goddesses.” The whole of the name becomes the speech vajra — for example, Tārā, Pāṇḍarā, Māmakī, Locanā. These names are the speech vajra.
This is likewise with the whole name of every phenomenon.
Letters “other than the complete name are those of the body vajra,” for example, oṃ tāre tutāre ture svāhā.275 The commentary continues with examples of the other goddesses’ mantras and then states: All chain mantras apart from the body-vajra mantras are branch mantras. The way they are to be recited This is in three parts.
First, the way to recite mind-vajra mantras.
The Root Tantra, quoted in the Great Commentary, says:
In meditation and recitation, for the practice of
the first of the mantra, whether consonant or vowel, it is taught that the activities are of six types.276 Therefore those who meditate upon and recite the first letter of the name mantra, whether it is consonant or vowel, must perform six kinds of activities.
Concerning these six, the Root Tantra says:
First, piercing, then descent,
followed by burning,
raising up by mantra,
increase, and pleasing.277
Therefore the six activities are piercing, descending, burning, raising, increase, and pleasing. Concerning piercing, the text continues:
Emptiness with visarga
added before the mantra,
pierced by the king of weapons,
and attained while unconscious.278 “Emptiness with visarga,” meaning the element of space-letter ha with a visarga, is added “before the mantra,” meaning on top of the first letter of the mantra, and recited. This pierces the deity with the king of weapons, and the practitioner attains the deity while it is unconscious.
On the number of recitations to perform and the function of this activity the text says:
With a hundred thousand recitations of the mind vajra,
the mantra deity loses consciousness,
abandons all pride,
and is under the power of the yogi.279
On the second activity, called descending, the text says:
Similarly if air is added,
the deity comes to the yogi.280 If the air-element letter ya with a visarga is added on top of the first letter of the name and recited, the deity will come to the yogi. This activity of descending will be accomplished by one hundred thousand recitations. On the activity of burning, the Root Tantra says: If fire is added,
burning is accomplished.281
If the fire letter ra plus visarga is added to the top of the first letter of a particular mantra and recited, the fire activity is initiated. It will be accomplished by one hundred thousand recitations. On the activity of raising, the text says: Similarly, by water, raising is performed.282 If the water letter wa plus visarga is added to the top of the first letter of a particular mantra and recited, the raising activity is initiated.
It will be accomplished by one hundred thousand recitations.
On the activity of increase the text says: If earth resting on the crown is recited, the deity increases.283 If the earth letter la plus visarga is added to the top of the first letter of a particular mantra and recited, increase is initiated.
On the activity of pleasing, the text states:
If “drop” is added to the crown,
it grants the greatest delight.284 If “drop” or an anusvāra is added to the crown or head of the first letter of a particular mantra and recited, the activity of pleasing the deity is initiated. As the Condensed Tantra says: If the recitations of these six activities are performed, the deity being practiced will grant the supreme.285 The last two activities are also accomplished by one hundred thousand recitations.
The text states:
Six hundred recitations
will fulfill one’s wishes. In the Original Buddha Mahātantra
the Buddha has taught this as preliminary meditation.286 Therefore each of the six activities requires a hundred thousand recitations.
The endings of the mantras of the six activities are respectively phaṭ, hūḥ, boṣaṭaṃ,287 namaṃ, svāhā, and baṣaṭa.
The beginning of each is oṃ.
The text continues:
The syllable phaṭ, likewise hūḥ, boṣaṭa, namaṃ, svāhā, baṣaṭa: these the meditator puts onto the mantras of
the six activities respectively.
At the beginning, Vairocana.288
First the six hundred thousand mantra recitations of the six activities are performed.
Then fire offerings of one tenth of the recitations are offered. After that ten million speech vajra recitations of the deity’s whole name mantra are performed, and fire offerings of one tenth of the recitations are performed.
After that, body-vajra recitations of mantras other than the name mantra are performed, and fire offerings of one tenth of the recitations are performed. The text goes on to say that whatever deity one is practicing, it will be accomplished by these activities:
Again the recitations are performed.
After ten million have been completed,
fire offerings of one tenth;
perform the rituals taught in the tantra,
and deity practice will be accomplished.
With these powers the mantra practitioner is granted the supreme deity and all desires.289
However will the deity practice and other attainments that one strives for, such as the siddhis of peace, increase, and so forth, be accomplished merely by these recitations as they are explained here?
The teachings in the text are given on the basis that certain conditions such as the family of one’s deity, the rituals used to accomplish the activity, the time of practice, the seed syllables of the mantras, the element family, the place of practice, the direction, the practitioner’s seat, and so on are all complete and are followed as taught in the tantra and commentary.
If these conditions are not met, the activities will not be accomplished.
The text continues:
All activities of other families, other rituals, other times, mantra families, places,
directions, and seats,
will produce no result.290
On this point, the Great Commentary, on verse 168 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, clearly explains how the six activities and the mind-vajra, speech-vajra, and body-vajra mantra recitations are to be performed in application to the mantra of Tārā before moving on to other families:
Concerning the mantras, piercing, etc., is as follows.
First it is taught using the mantra of Tārā. With this one can know the others.
The mantra oṃ hatāṃ291 phaṭ accomplishes the piercing and is to be recited one hundred thousand times.
Oṃ yatāṃ hūḥ accomplishes the descent.
Oṃ ratāṃ bauṣaṭa accomplishes the burning.
Oṃ watāḥ namaṃ accomplishes the raising.
Oṃ latāṃ svāhā accomplishes the increase.
Oṃ tāṃ waṣaṭa292 accomplishes the pleasing.
Six hundred recitations and sixty thousand fire offerings are to be performed.
Then the speech vajra oṃ tāre svāhā is recited ten million times, and fire offerings of one tenth are made.
Then the body vajra oṃ tāre tutāre ture svāhā is recited ten million times, at the end of which one million fire offerings are made.
In this way the yogi is granted the supreme deity of the mantra, but in other ways not.293 Therefore the mind-vajra recitations and the six activities followed by speech-vajra and body-vajra meditations, each with the requisite number of recitations, must be learned before the practice of each deity.
Moreover, to accomplish deity practice and to accomplish the activities, these practices must be performed without confusion regarding deity family and so on as described in the individual tantras. This is the peerless thinking of the tantra and the Great Commentary.
This has been a presentation of the generation stage roughly compiled from the Methods of Accomplishment chapter.
Gnosis: The Completion Stage The Six-Branched Yoga Presentation of the Completion Stage This has three outlines:
1.The sites of penetrative focusing: A special explanation of the vajra body 2.Penetrative focusing: A common presentation of the piercing six-branched yoga 3.Presentation of each of the six yogas
The sites of penetrative focusing: A special explanation of the vajra body This is under three headings: 1.The host channels 2.The winds
3.The placed bodhicitta drops
The host channels This is in three sections: 1.The six great channels and the six cakras
2.The channels as sites of penetrative focusing
3.Which channels are to be penetrated during which of the six yogas The six great channels and the six cakras The right, left, and central channels reach down to the tip of the genital organ and the anus, and up through the center of the body just in front of the spine. Inside the skull they bend, so that the upper tip of the right channel is at the right nostril, the left channel is at the left nostril, and the tip of the central channel reaches the bridge of the nose directly between the nostrils.
The central channel above the navel is known variously as the Rāhu channel, dual elimination,1 and avadhūtī. It is green in color and belongs to the element space.
The right channel above the navel is known as rasanā and as the sun channel. It is red, of the fire element, and mainly carries blood.
The left channel above the navel is known as lalanā and as the moon channel. It is white, of the water element, and mainly carries seminal fluid.
These three channels above the navel are dominated by the life-sustaining wind, which flows within them.
Below the navel the central and right channels continue to the tip of the genital organ.
The continuation of the central channel below the navel is known variously as śaṅkhinī, the all-pervading channel, and the Kālāgni channel. It is blue, of the gnosis element, and mainly carries seminal fluid. The right channel below the navel is known as meṣa2 and as the urine channel. It is black, of the wind element, and mainly carries urine.
The contin uation of the left channel below the navel reaches to the anus.
It is known as piṅgalā3 and as the excrement channel. It is yellow, of the earth element, and mainly carries excrement.
These three are ruled by the downwardly expelling wind, which flows through them.
In this way the three channels above the navel and the three below make up the six great channels.
As previously explained in the section on the Inner chapter, the six cakras comprise the four-petal crown cakra, the sixteen-petal brow cakra, the thirty-two-petal throat cakra, the eight-petal heart cakra, the sixty-four-petal navel cakra, and the thirty-two-petal secret-place cakra.
At the locations of these six cakras, the right channel and its continuation below the navel is coiled around the central channel, and the left channel and its continuation is also coiled around the central channel, thereby producing a series of double channel knots.
At each of these channel knots the channel petals on their immediate right reach into the entwined central and right channels, and the channel petals on the immediate left reach into the joined left and central channels.
Between cakras, from the crown cakra to the brow cakra, brow to the throat, throat to the heart, heart to the navel, and navel to the secret place,  the central channel is in the center, while rasanā and lalanā and their two urine and excrement continuations are on the right and left respectively. Therefore between each cakra there are three pathways.
From the secret area onward, the excrement channel is in the center and travels to the anus. The urine channel is on the left, and the śaṅkhinī is on the right, and they both travel to the tip of the sex organ.
The authority for this explanation comes from the Great Commentary on verse 120 of the Gnosis chapter:
“Arriving at the place of nectar, channels are knotted in series.” The place of nectar is the brow.
“Arriving at the place of nectar” refers to lalanā, rasanā, and avadhūtī.
They are knotted in series, and so between the navel and the heart there are three pathways. The avadhūtī is central, traveling from the center of the navel.
The lalanā and rasanā flow into the left and right petals.
Then, between the heart and the throat, there are three pathways.
Similarly there are three pathways between the throat and the brow and three between the brow and the crown. In this way there are four lots of three paths. The lalanā travels from the left nostril to other locations for a distance of twelve and “part.”4 This is taught in the Inner chapter.
The rasanā travels from the right.
The avadhūtī travels from between the two nostrils.
Between the navel and the secret area are the three pathways. The excrement and urine channels travel from the left and right. The śaṅkhinī in the center travels to the secret lotus.
Below the secret lotus the excrement channel travels from the center. The urine channel travels from the left to the male or female organ. The seminal fluid channel travels from the right.5
Other descriptions state that below the navel, the central channel bends to a position on the right, the continuation of the lalanā left channel bends to the center, and the continuation of the rasanā right channel bends to the left. This description is in contradiction to the above commentary text. The numbers of channel petals, the elements they belong to, and their descriptions are clearly taught in the Inner chapter of the tantra and commentary and have been explained in the section on the Inner chapter.
The source for those descriptions is the Inner chapter, whereas the sources for the descriptions of the  six great channels in this section are in the Gnosis chapter.
The channel petals penetrate the entwined left, right, and center channels.
In the channel petals on the left, the winds of the elements flow in the order of space, air, fire, water, and earth before flowing through the left channel and through the left nostril. In the right channel petals they flow earth, water, fire, air, and space into the right channel and through the right nostril.
As for the inward flow of wind, the earth wind flows as far as the navel, the water-element wind reaches one fingerwidth below the navel, the fire wind reaches two fingerwidths below the navel, the air-element wind reaches three fingerwidths, and the space-element wind reaches four fingerwidths below the navel.
Fifty-six and a quarter breaths flow through the upper opening of the central channel during each of the twelve great wind movements. Moreover, at the locations of each of the cakras, there are entrances for the winds to flow into the central channel.
These tenets are particular to this system. The channels as sites of penetrative focusing Penetrative focusing6 means that mental focus is fixed on points of the body, such as the cakras, and major points of the body are pierced or penetrated to produce gnosis. This is penetrative focusing on the body. These major points are inside the central channel, at locations in the middle of the cakras, and also at the central channel’s upper and lower openings.
The experiences arising from piercing these points and meditating upon them are different for each point. Which channels are to be penetrated during which of the six yogas
During the yogas of withdrawal and meditative absorption, the focus is on the upper opening of the central channel. During prāṇāyāma and recollection it is the point at the center of the navel cakra. During the yoga of retention the focus for penetration is inside the central channel at the centers of the six cakras.
During meditative-concentration yoga, focus is from the lower opening of the central channel to the upper opening. The winds As explained previously during the section on the Inner chapter, there are ten winds.
They are:
life-sustaining, downwardly expelling, coexisting, upwardly moving, pervading, nāga, turtle, lizard, devadatta, and dhanaṃjaya.
The places where these winds are first created and where they reside in the meantime7 are the ten channel petals of the heart cakra.8 The inside of the dhūtī above the upper channel knot of the heart cakra is where the life-sustaining wind is first produced and where it resides.
Inside the lower dhūtī, the downwardly expelling wind is first created and resides.
The currents of the life-sustaining wind are in the three great upper channels, and the downwardly expelling winds are in the three lower great channels.
The eight channel petals from the one at the east, or front, of the body clockwise around to the northeastern petal are the birthplaces and locations of the equalizing, turtle, upwardly moving, lizard, nāga, dhanaṃjaya, pervading, and devadatta winds.
The pathways of these winds are like the waters of large irrigation canals, which divide up and flow into many more smaller canals. Each of the ten winds that dwells within the ten channel petals divides off into many other smaller channels, thereby spreading through all the channels of the body. The placed bodhicitta drops A general description of the red and white drops was given in the Inner chapter.
Here the focus will be on the drops that produce the four periods.
The body, speech, mind, and gnosis drops, the four enlightened body, speech, mind, and gnosis drops, and the drops of the four periods are synonymous.
Their locations are as follows. In the center of the brow cakra is the body or enlightened body drop, which creates the waking period.
In the center of the throat cakra is the speech or enlightened speech drop, which creates the dream period.
In the center of the heart cakra is the mind or enlightened mind drop, which creates the deep sleep period. In the center of the navel cakra is the gnosis drop,  which creates the fourth or bliss period.
The four drops that create the four periods are also found, in the above order, at the center of the navel, secret, and jewel cakras, and at the tip of the jewel, the lower opening of the central channel.
The reason for positing the fourth period at the navel and at the tip of the jewel is as follows.
In ordinary existence, when the element melts and falls — for instance, during sexual desire — the bliss experienced is greater when it arrives at these two places than at other places.
This is because the drop that creates the fourth period is located in these two places.
Concerning the locations of the red and white elements, a predominance of the white element with a little of the red is found in the center of the brow and jewel cakras and also at the tip of the jewel at the lower end of the central channel.
However the actual basic white element that is responsible for its own increase is found at the brow cakra.
A predominance of the red element with a little white is found at the centers of the navel, throat, and secret cakras.
At the heart cakra the red and white elements dwell in equal quantities.
As for the nature of these drops located in these places, previous lamas of this tradition of the six yogas have said that we can understand them as taught in the Vajra Garland Explanatory Tantra, namely, droplike mixtures of the red and white elements the size of mustard seeds. According to the tradition of this tantra and its commentary, the root of all obscuration is the obscuration of the four periods. How then are the drops that create the waking period and so forth explained as obscurations?
The great scholars have asserted these drops to be matter.9 Moreover, considering that it would be unsuitable to posit matter, particularly matter that is newly produced in this life, as actual obscurations present since beginningless time, these scholars have said that very subtle mind and wind are hidden  within each of these drops, and on these winds is imprinted the potential for obscurations.
From these potencies, the obscurations of mental afflictions arise, from which arise phenomena obscurations. The way these four drops exist in the four places is spoken of in the Great Commentary on verse 120 of the Gnosis chapter:
“Nāda” refers to the enlightened mind drop at the heart that creates the periods of very deep sleep.
“Drop” refers to the enlightened body drop at the brow that creates the waking periods.
“Part” refers to the enlightened speech drop at the throat that creates dreams.
“Gnosis” refers to the gnosis drop that creates the fourth period.10
The reasons why these four drops are said to create deep sleep and so forth are as follows. In ordinary existence coarse winds gather at the center of the jewel and at the heart. When this happens, mostly dreamless sleep occurs. The winds spread out from those places, and when they arrive at the secret place and at the throat, mostly long dreams occur.
Spreading out from these two places, the winds arrive at the navel and the brow, where sleep ceases and the appearance of various objects occurs.
The reason the other drop is said to create the fourth period has already been explained. Generally highest yoga tantra asserts that we possess within us something that, by skillful means, can be transformed into the qualities of enlightenment.
In particular the Great Commentary talks of the four drops as being drops of enlightened body, speech, mind, and gnosis.
Such passages teach that the body drop possesses the capacity to create various enlightened forms, such as the nirmāṇakāya, the speech drop has the capacity to produce the saṃbhogakāya of fully aspected speech, the mind drop has the capacity to produce the nonconceptual dharmakāya mind, and the gnosis drop has the capacity to produce the svabhāvikakāya, the nature body, of great bliss.
Within these four drops, which produce the periods of waking, dream, deep sleep, and the fourth state of bliss, is found the capacity to produce during ordinary existence, respectively, various appearances, faulty utterances such as lies, unclear nonconceptual minds such as deep sleep, and the bliss of emission.
These capacities are purified by practice on the path. This means that their capabilities to merely produce various forms, sounds, nonconceptual states, and bliss are brought into the path and these are transformed into various empty forms, indestructible sound, nonconceptual gnosis, and unchanging bliss.
These in turn are further purified and developed by the path to produce the final results of practice, the various nirmāṇakāya forms, the fully aspected saṃbhogakāya of speech, the nonconceptual dharmakāya mind, and the svabhāvikakāya of great unchanging bliss.
One should learn this general description of the vajra body, and specifically the descriptions of the channels, winds, and drops, because the whole path of the completion stage is a piercing of the channels, winds, and drops.
Penetrative focusing: A common presentation of the six-branched yoga This is under three headings:
1.General structure of the six-branched completion-stage yoga 2.Determining the number and order of the yogas
3.Texts to rely on for explanations of the six-branched yoga General structure of the six-branched completion-stage yoga
The six yogas can be condensed into three — virtue at the beginning, virtue in the middle, and virtue at the end.
These are known as the three purities.
They may also be condensed into the four vajras, the four yogas, the four branches of approximation and accomplishment, and the four branches of accomplishment of form, accomplishment of wind, accomplishing bliss, and accomplished bliss.
How do the six yogas fit into these structures?
The first two yogas, withdrawal and meditative absorption, make up the purity of virtue in the beginning, the body vajra of the four vajras, shape yoga of the four yogas, approximation from the four branches of approximation and accomplishment, and the branch of accomplishment of form.
The next two yogas, prāṇāyāma and retention, make up the purity of virtue in the middle, the speech vajra, mantra yoga, the branch of near accomplishment, and the branch of wind accomplishment.
The last two yogas, recollection and meditative concentration, make up the purity of virtue at the end. The yoga of recollection is the mind vajra, the dharma yoga, the branch of accomplishment, and the branch of accomplishing bliss.
The yoga of meditative concentration is the gnosis vajra, the purity yoga, the branch of great accomplishment, and the branch of accomplished bliss.
Determining the number and order of the yogas
The number and order of the yogas are determined by the nature of the final attainment.
In this practice the final attainment is the nondual gnosis of enlightenment, which is a method-and-wisdom indivisible union of unchanging great bliss and empty form.
The immediate cause of such an attainment must be the yoga of meditative concentration, because there is no need to train on any path higher than the branch of meditative concentration. The Five Stages says:
Dwelling in meditative concentration of union,
there is no training again in any other.11
In Kālacakra practice, likewise, when dwelling in the branch of meditative concentration, “there is no training again in any other.” For the yoga of meditative concentration to induce the great unchanging bliss, it must be preceded by the yoga of recollection, which consists of an experience of great innate bliss induced by relying upon the three kinds of mudrā consorts.
This includes the creation of an actual empty-form mahāmudrā consort, because if an actual empty-form mother and father in union is not created, the basis for the creation of the great unchanging bliss is missing.
While relying on the three kinds of mudrā consorts, the bodhicitta element is not emitted but held at the cakras to produce the great bliss of the yoga of recollection. This must be preceded by the yoga of retention, in which the winds and drops are held unmoving at the very center of the cakras. This yoga of retention must be preceded by the yoga of prāṇāyāma, in which the flow of wind  in the left and right channels is halted and made to flow only in the central channel.
Before the winds of the right and left channels are halted and made to flow only in the central channel, they must first enter the central channel and purify it. Before an actual empty-form body can be created for use in the yoga of recollection, a saṃbhogakāya within a “black line emitting pure light rays”12 must be developed. These attainments are achieved by the yoga of withdrawal. The yoga of meditative absorption stabilizes the signs attained by the yoga of withdrawal. These two yogas, therefore, precede the others.
In this way the attainment of the final goal, wherein unchanging bliss and the empty-form body of enlightenment are indivisibly united, must be preceded by the six yogas.
Moreover, because the completion stage requires no more yogas than these six, the number of the yogas is determined as six, while the order of the yogas is determined as above.
With this in mind the Later Guhyasamāja Tantra says:
With the branches of meditation at six,
practice to accomplish the supreme.
Practices using other means
do not become the supreme siddhi.13 This verse states explicitly that if these six branches are not completed in their entirety, there will be no supreme accomplishment, which means conversely that a complete practice of the six branches on the completion stage will bring the supreme accomplishment.
Therefore the practices are enumerated as six, and the sequence of practice is similar to the above explanation.
What are these six branches? The text continues:
Withdrawal, meditative absorption, prāṇāyāma, retention,
recollection, and meditative concentration:14 this is the six-branched yoga.15
Texts to rely on for explanations of the six-branched yoga The omniscient Tsongkhapa said:
Know that withdrawal and meditative absorption
gather winds into the upper opening of avadhūtī. Know the spontaneous, profound vajra recitation performed
with mantra and wind inseparable in the Rāhu path.
Know how the life and downward winds, by vaselike meditation,
are in the central channel in the form of embrace.
Know how winds enter the drops by retention
and emanations go forth from and withdraw back into the pure body.
Know how the lotus of the empty-form mudrā consort
in recollection yoga induces great unchanging bliss.
Therefore, teachers of Kālacakra,
this system is superior to other systems;
not to know that, teachers of Kālacakra,
is to be like reflections of the moon in water.16 The meanings of these vajra words were taught by Jé Tsongkhapa himself and were transcribed by others in the past in the form of notes.
Using these words as a basis, further supplemental texts that provide a sure and firm knowledge of these topics include the Condensed Tantra, the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries, Short Teachings on the View, Paramārthasevā, Nāro pa’s Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations, the Six Yogas by the mahāsiddha Anupamarakṣita and its commentary by Sūryaśrī, three works, all entitled Six Yogas, by Kālacakrapāda, Cilupa, and Śavaripa, and Commentary to the Six Yogas of Kālacakra Tantra by Avadhūtipa.
Presentation of each of the six yogas Jé Tsongkhapa’s Notes on Kālacakra says: If the outlines also are presented this way, it will engender great certainty of understanding regarding the body of the path.17
Therefore this topic will be presented under two headings:
1.The accomplishment of empty form, the actual creator of great bliss
2.The branch of meditative concentration: The final attainment of the meditations The accomplishment of empty form, the actual creator of great bliss
1.Indirect accomplishment
2.Actual accomplishment
Indirect accomplishment 1.Accomplishment of form
2.Accomplishment of the winds
Accomplishment of form 1.Accomplishment of form as yet unachieved: The branch of withdrawal
2.Stabilizing form once accomplished:
The branch of meditative absorption Accomplishment of form as yet unachieved: The branch of withdrawal According to the Kālacakrapāda Transmission, “All have six divisions.”18 This means that each of the six yogas are to be explained in six sections. Therefore this outline of the achievement of form as yet unachieved, or the branch of withdrawal, has six parts:
1.The meaning of the term withdrawal
2.The time for meditation
3.The way to meditate 4.Valid cognition
5.Purification divisions
6.Results The meaning of the term withdrawal Verse 116 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter says:
In withdrawal within the body, the ten subjects and objects are not engaged.19 The Great Commentary on this verse says:
Now the definition of withdrawal and so forth is taught. Withdrawal means that within the body, consciousness is not engaged in the conjunction of the ten subjects and objects. The five others, eyes and so forth, are engaged in empty-form objects.20 These two passages teach the etymology of the term withdrawal.
The five sense organs of the eyes and so forth are halted from engaging with their individual objects of external form and so forth and are withdrawn inside. Therefore this branch is called withdrawal. Because the connections between individual sense organs and individual objects are abandoned or cut, this yoga is also known as individual abandonment and individual severing. How are connections to the sense objects severed, and how are the senses prevented from engaging their objects?
Stopping the sense consciousnesses from engaging their objects by the power of mindfulness and awareness21 and by one-pointedly fixing the mind upon an object is not sufficient here.
In those cases, the sense consciousnesses do not engage their objects simply because the immediate preceding cause is missing or because the mind is dwelling firmly in common peaceful abiding.22 The Compendium of Valid Cognition says: Consciousness absorbed by something has no power to engage anything else.23
So where is the mind placed in this context? By focusing on and penetrating the points on the body the winds will enter the dhūtī. Because the winds are vehicles of the sense consciousnesses, the sense consciousnesses themselves are turned away from their objects,  and the connection between sense and object is broken.
This is a severing of the connection between the five senses and the five objects and not a break between mental consciousness and its objects.
Severing the connection between sense and sense object is an explanation of the term withdrawal in terms of what is negated.
As an explanation of its etymology in terms of what is accomplished, the Great Commentary says:
The five others, eyes and so forth, are engaged in empty-form objects.24
The other five senses, such as the fleshly eye25 and so forth, are engaged in five other objects, such as empty form and so forth, with each withdrawing into its own individual object. This is also why this yoga is called withdrawal. This explanation of the meaning of this term has certain similarities to the etymology of withdrawal found in Bright Lamp.
One difference is that in the Bright Lamp explanation, the ripened sense organs26 engage in external form and so forth, while here the fleshly eye, rather than the ripened eye, engages with empty forms and so forth.
Concerning these empty sounds and empty forms, such as smoke and mirages, the Great Commentary says on verse 115 of the Gnosis chapter:
With the yoga of forms one hears all manner of indestructible sound. From the appearance of form comes the nirmāṇakāya, and from the appearance of sound comes the saṃbhogakāya.27 From the above, we must also infer empty form, smells, tastes, and touch. Therefore four “other” senses, in addition to the “other” eye, or fleshly eye, can be asserted.
The Great Commentary, on verse 103 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
Now near accomplishment is taught. “Individual” and so on refers to withdrawal. The withdrawal of the surroundings refers to the sense organs of the eyes and so forth apprehending their objects of form and so forth, and the abandoning of that is called withdrawal.
Concerning empty forms, other eyes such as eyes of flesh, apprehend other forms as their objects. This is near accomplishment.28 This passage mirrors the explanation of withdrawal as described above.
But isn’t this section  the branch of approximation consisting of withdrawal and meditative absorption?
What does near accomplishment refer to here?
When the completion stage is divided into its four branches of approximation and accomplishment, withdrawal and meditative absorption do comprise the branch of approximation.
But the quote above is based on the inner and outer samaya and so forth being posited as the branch of approximation, and so there is no fault.29 The time for meditation
Some say that the time for meditation is when the earth wind flows from the right nostril onto the right side of the lips.
However this is not conclusive, because the earth wind that flows onto the lips is to the earth wind of the minor elements, and the instruction that one should begin the meditation of withdrawal when earth wind flows from the right nostril is given for purposes of illustration only. Therefore the Great Commentary on verse 122 of the Gnosis chapter says:
“Earth” is an illustration. If the yogi meditates when it flows through the right channel, this is the time for the ritual, but not when it flows through the left channel, because that is in the order of space and so forth.30 This passage teaches the time for beginning withdrawal meditation.
Illustrating this with the earth wind passing through the right nostril means that when any kind of wind passes through the right nostril, it will be in the dissolution order,31 and therefore withdrawal is easier. This is the reason for beginning withdrawal meditation at that time.
When the winds flow through the left nostril, they flow in the creation order of space, air, fire, water, and earth. This makes withdrawal harder, and therefore it is not taught as the time for withdrawal meditation. The way to meditate This has five outlines: 1.Sources for the assertion that during withdrawal, winds must enter the central channel by the force of meditation
2.Division of withdrawal into two parts, plus reasons for the division
3.The meditations of the two parts
4.Ritual of enhancement at times of nonaccomplishment
5.Even if one dies with the remainder of the meditations unfinished, the power of the yoga ensures continuation Sources for the assertion that during withdrawal, winds must enter the central channel by the force of meditation
The Root Tantra, quoted in the Supreme and Unchanging Gnosis summary of the Gnosis chapter, says:
Meditating on smoke and so forth
mind is made immovable, the central channel is purified.32
And in the same summary:
Meditating on the signs of smoke and so forth,
the beginner purifies the central channel.33 These quotes teach that during withdrawal, the central channel is purified.
On how this is done, Notes on Kālacakra says:
Using the comparison of an irrigation canal that must be cleaned before feeding water into it, the cleaner or purifier of the central channel is the wind.
Without entering the central channel, how could the winds clean the inside of the channel from the outside?
To say that one could clean the inside of an irrigation channel from the outside would be strange indeed!34 As this quote makes clear, it is necessary for the winds to enter the central channel in order to clean the inside of it.
Also the Great Commentary on verse 120 of the Gnosis chapter says:
“Wind in the central channel” and so forth speaks of the yoga of withdrawal. Here initially the yogi places the winds in the central channel, by which he will see the signs within the avadhūtī.35 These quotes clearly state that the winds must enter the central channel during the process of withdrawal. But one may wonder if this quote refers to the branch of prāṇāyāma.
That cannot be, because the quote continues, “Glorious guru, body vajra of the Buddha,”36  thereby placing it in the approximation and body vajra section.
After this sentence the text continues, “Prāṇāyāma is the second, the speech vajra,” thereby placing prāṇā yāma within the speech vajra section.
Furthermore the Great Commentary, on verse 115 of the Gnosis chapter, says:
Here the winds enter the central channel, and from the total emptiness the signs of smoke and so forth are seen. Therefore, “with the mind fixed into space, the eyes unclosed, the vajra path is entered. From the emptiness arises smoke, mirage, a clear, uncontaminated light in the sky, a butter-lamp flame.” These are seen in the night yoga.37 This clearly states that during the night yoga of the withdrawal process, the winds enter the central channel, causing empty forms to arise.
The Great Commentary states on verse 118 of the Gnosis chapter:
Like an illusory town they have colors, such as white and so forth, but because they are immaterial there are no colors. Although they are endowed with many features, they are never seen by ordinary beings.
Why is that?
“It is by the power of the māra of mental affliction,” whereby the winds flow in the left and right channels.38
From this quote too we can understand that for the empty forms of the withdrawal yoga to appear, winds must enter the central channel, because while winds are flowing in the right and left channel, empty forms as part of the yogas of withdrawal and so forth are not seen. In the commentary called Filled with Good Qualities by Sūryaśrī, it says:
These appearances to the mind are seen when the left and right channel join as one.39 This means that seeing the appearances of smoke and so forth is due to the right and left channel joining as one in the central channel.
Śavaripa also says:
By the three unmoving,
the ten winds enter the dhūtī,
outer and inner conceiving is halted,
and the signs arise; this the branch of individual cutting.40 This also means that for the ten signs of withdrawal to arise, the ten winds must move into the central channel.
The Kālacakrapāda Transmission also states:
Meditate on withdrawal this way:
meditate on emptiness, the object of meditation,
and halt the winds that are to be stopped.41 Therefore, by meditating on the practices of withdrawal, the winds of the right and left channel are halted and moved to the central channel. These and other quotes are from the tantra, its commentary, and other Indian texts.
Earlier scholars of the Kālacakra tradition,  such as those of the Jonang, also accepted this explanation. However the Great Commentary says: During withdrawal and so forth, when forms are seen but instances of the unchanging have not been generated, because the winds have not been bound, at that time meditate on the nāda, which will be explained, and by wrathful means bring them to the central channel.42 Doesn’t this teach a scenario where the empty forms of withdrawal are seen but the winds have not entered the central channel? These words do teach a time during the meditations of withdrawal where the signs of smoke and so forth can be seen without the winds having entered the central channel.
However such an experience is not on the actual path of withdrawal, because before the definitive empty forms on the path of withdrawal are seen, the winds must have entered the central channel, and if that is not the case, one should perform the above-mentioned enhancement ritual to accomplish it.
If the winds have to enter the central channel during withdrawal, how is that achieved?
To this some reply by quoting the Kālacakrapāda Transmission:
On a comfortable seat,
guard the body in vajra position,
tongue turned back, clasped to stomach, eyes turned upward, in the manner of
Uṣṇīṣacakrī,43 hands vajra-bound.
This will bind the winds.44 Therefore, they maintain, by adopting a sitting posture and gazing in a certain way, the winds will be bound within the central channel.
This cannot be correct.
Because it would mean that the meditations of withdrawal would not involve practices of mental placement.
This follows because the primary effect of the withdrawal meditations is that the power of the winds in the central channel causes the signs of smoke and so forth to appear, and, according to you, adopting a seated posture and placing the eyes in a certain way by themselves halt the winds of the right and left channel and send them into the central channel, and moreover, in the yoga of withdrawal, the process of winds entering the central channel to bring about the resultant appearance of empty-form signs is a natural cause-and-effect occurrence.
You must accept the reasons for this consequence, but you cannot accept the consequence itself,45 because there are explanations of mental placement in the Great Commentary. The Jonang tradition and most Tibetan practitioners of the six yogas assert a positioning of the eyes that takes place in a darkened room. They say the eyes are fixed on a point in space outside the body directly in front of the point midway between the eyebrows.
The mental placement involves focusing the mind one-pointedly on that very point in the space of a darkened room on which the eyes have focused. There it is held without the slightest wandering, in a relaxed manner, and without any mental activity.46 This, they maintain, ensures that the winds enter the central channel and that the signs will appear.
If this were the case, they must assert, and do assert, that a mental placement determined by the position of the eyes and body is sufficient to bring the winds into the central channel.
If so, then it must be accepted that when an ārya traveling the path by the Perfection Vehicle is in the sevenfold position of Vairocana47 in meditative equipoise and focused single-pointedly upon emptiness, he has necessarily halted the flow of winds in the left and right channels.
Alternatively, if that is not accepted, then you would have to differentiate between this situation, where the winds have not entered the central channel, and the situation where the winds have entered the central channel through placing the mind one-pointedly on a point in space in a darkened room. However it is difficult to make a distinction between these two situations.
Our position is that it is the mental placement itself that brings the winds into the central channel. This and the sources will be explained below. Division of withdrawal into two parts, plus reasons for the division This is under two headings:
1.Dividing withdrawal into night yoga and day yoga 2.Reasons for this division Dividing withdrawal into night yoga and day yoga The Great Commentary, on verse 115 of the Gnosis chapter, says:
Yoga meditations of the Perfection Vehicle and the Mantra Vehicle are of two kinds, namely those in space and those without cover.48 Yoga meditations are of two kinds: those “in space” are night yogas, and those “without cover” are day yogas.
The way yoga meditations of the Perfection Vehicle are divided in two is found in the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary:
Therefore, in the meditations of withdrawal, the Buddha has said that conceptual meditation is not seen.
This meditation the Buddha has taught in the perfection of wisdom scriptures:
“Then Indra, Lord of the gods, said to Subhūti, ‘Noble Subhūti, how does one practice yoga in the perfection of wisdom?’ Subhūti replied, ‘Kauśika, one who practices yoga in space practices yoga in the perfection of wisdom.
Kauśika, one who practices yoga without cover practices yoga in the perfection of wisdom.’” Therefore the Buddha taught the mahāmudrā meditation by which the prognostic imagelike and the illusionlike appear in the cloudless sky.49
The passage quoted from a perfection of wisdom sutra teaching the yoga practices “in space” and “without cover” shows similarities with the Buddha’s teachings from the highest yoga tantras that explain the night yogas and day yogas of the withdrawal practice, wherein various illusionlike and prognostic imagelike empty forms are seen.
This is indicated by the sentence of the commentary beginning, “Therefore the Buddha.” However do not take this commentary to mean that the day and night yogas of withdrawal are taught in the perfection of wisdom sutras.
If that were the case, it would mean that becoming a suitable vessel for receiving the perfection of wisdom sutras would entail receiving all four initiations. Reasons for this division
Previous lamas have said that a year consists of the sun’s northward and southward passages,  a month consists of two periods of waxing and waning, and a day consists of daytime and nighttime, and that those are reasons for the division into day and night yogas.
Our own position is that both day and night yogas are necessary to ensure that whenever the meditation is performed, in daytime or in darkness, all desired signs are made manifest.
In nighttime meditation the empty-form signs are easier to manifest and to ascertain than in daytime meditation. Therefore it is taught that the night yoga is performed first and followed by the day yoga.
The reason for the difference in the degree of difficulty in manifesting the signs is explained as follows. When the eyes are positioned and the meditation object is held during the day, the winds of the eyes are not rigid, and it is not possible to banish an everpresent grayish appearance. This makes it difficult for empty forms to arise.
In darkness this grayish appearance is not there, and this makes it easier for empty forms to appear. Withdrawal: Night Yoga The meditations of the two sections This has two outlines:
1.Nighttime yoga meditations 2.Daytime yoga meditations Nighttime yoga meditations This is under five headings:
1.The place of meditation
2.Posture and binding 3.Positioning the eyes 4.Mental placement 5.The signs of meditative accomplishment and their appearance
The place of meditation The Great Commentary, on verse 115 of the Gnosis chapter, says: Those who practice the yoga in space are in the night, in the darkness of a room with no holes.50 Mañjuśrīkīrti, a manifestation of Mañjuśrī, states in the Essence of the Three Yogas:
In a house with no break in the darkness.51
In Cilupa’s Six Yogas Also:
First is withdrawal;
begin at night then in the day
in a tall house with no holes.52 The meditations should be performed in the kind of darkened room that matches the description taught in these and other quotes.
What should that room be like?
Those who have the means should meditate in the middle story of a three-story house. The reason is that such a room avoids the harms of vapors from the earth below and the dripping of water from above.
If that is not possible, the room should be built on dry ground, not damp underfoot, with a high ceiling.
The windows should be narrow on the outside and wide on the inside and be easy to cover, with a blanket, for example.
Apart from those openings, there should not even be a hole the size of a hair tip in the room.
Everywhere should be smoothly plastered, and the entrance should have three turns in it to cut out all light.
If that is not possible, hang a curtain over any cracks or openings in the door, and make the room very dark.
The reason for this is that if any light enters the room, it will damage the eyes, thoughts will appear, and deluding appearances will be seen.
Posture and binding
Essence of the Three Yogas says:
In a house with no break in the darkness,
the practitioner in deep equipoise
performs the five actions and the two bindings,
which can be known from the guru.53 The five actions are the actions of parts of the body.
The two bindings refer to the holding of mind and winds within the central channel.
The way these can be known is by the guru’s demonstration.
They are described in the Kālacakrapāda Transmission:
On a comfortable seat, the body straight, in vajra position,
tongue turned back, clasped to stomach, eyes turned upward, in the manner of
Uṣṇīṣacakrī, hands vajra-bound.
This will bind the winds.54
Cilupa says:
Mount Meru is straight, four continents gathered in,
sun and moon spread above, the tongue is moved,
vajra binding subdues the oceans,
the great winds of the heart flow: these are the actions of the body;
they will hold the winds inside.
Look with the look of great Uṣṇīṣa.55
The two passages teach five postures as the actions and also that these actions are instrumental in binding the winds and mind.
The explanation of these two passages is as follows. “The body straight” and “Mount Meru is straight” mean that the spine is straight and erect.
Of the two phrases “in vajra position” and “four continents gathered in,” the former teaches the vajra position itself56 and the latter that the four limbs are gathered in.
Therefore the feet are in the vajra position. The line “vajra binding subdues the oceans” teaches that the two hands are bound as overlapping vajra fists and clasped to the abdomen.
The phrases “clasped to stomach” and “hands vajra-bound” from the first passage teach the same.
The phrases “tongue turned back” and “eyes turned upward” from the first passage and “the sun and moon spread above, the tongue is moved” from the second teach that the tongue is touching the palette and that both eyes look upward.
How they gaze upward is also clearly taught by the lines “in the manner of Uṣṇīṣacakrī” and “Look with the look of great Uṣṇīṣa.”
To summarize, the spine is straight and erect, the feet are in the vajra position, and the hands are bound as vajra fists crossed over the abdomen.
Alternatively the right hand is placed upon the upturned left with the thumbs touching in the equipoise mudrā, or both hands bound as vajra fists are placed upon the thighs in the Vajrasattva mudrā.57 Any of these positions is acceptable.
The Great Commentary states:
Hands are bound as vajra fists, thumbs held by fists, on the right and left thighs, resting on the vajra seat to become the vajra mudrā.58
Together with the tongue against the palette and the eyes looking upward, this five-part posture constitutes the five actions.
The winds and the mind held in the central channel by these five constitute the two bindings.
This is the explanation of the line “performs the five actions and the two bindings.” But wasn’t the assertion that the winds could be bound into the central channel by positioning the body and the eyes refuted?
That was a refutation of the assertion that positioning alone could bring the winds into the central channel.
The intention of the passages quoted from these Indian texts is that it is primarily the placement of the mind that brings the winds into the central channel.
However here they are describing the positioning of the body and the eyes as conducive conditions for the binding of the winds into the central channel. Therefore there is no contradiction. Positioning the eyes
The Great Commentary, on verse 120 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, states:
“With the wrathful look of Uṣṇīṣa,” with eyes not closed and looking above, the signs will appear.59 This quote speaks of the eyes not being closed and looking with the wrathful look of Uṣṇīṣa. “Looking above” means looking upward.
“Eyes not closed” means half shut and not moving.
The position of the eyes is also taught in the Rigi Ārāli Tantra when it states, “Half eyes turned upward.”60 Therefore the eyes are half covered by the eyelids and look toward the object of the mind’s focus.
The Great Commentary, on verse 115 of the Gnosis chapter, says, “With the mind fixed into space, the eyes unclosed,”61 which teaches that wherever the mind is fixed, there the eyes are positioned also, and that the eyes are slightly open and unmoving.
These explanations are mirrored by the Kālacakrapāda Transmission, when it says “eyes turned upward, in the manner of Uṣṇīṣacakrī”62 and by Cilupa, “Look with the look of great Uṣṇīṣa.”63
Mental placement If the eyes are positioned wherever the mind is placed, then what is the placement of the mind? This topic is under two headings:
1.Refuting that mental placement is a state of no thought
2.The validity of mental placement by mental application to an object Refuting that mental placement is a state of no thought
The Hevajra Tantra says:
Abandon all thoughts,
meditate thoroughly for a day.64
Also the Great Commentary begins, on verse 114 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter:
“First the emptiness enlightenment” means that in the darkness, do not think at all.65
Some think that the meaning of these and other quotes is that the mental placement for the yoga of withdrawal is to halt all mental activity and to place the mind in a state of no thought. This is clearly refuted by the Great Commentary in the Supreme and Unchanging Gnosis summary.
It begins with a presentation of the above assertion:
In the perfection of wisdom sutras, the Buddha has taught the no-thought gnosis of the tathāgatas to be the way to the attainment of the perfect and complete enlightenment of a buddha.
The passage continues up to:
The accomplishment of enlightenment is by the no-thought gnosis of the tathāgatas and not by conceptual meditative concentration.66
This is the assertion.
The text continues with the refutation:
In this way the ignorant assert no thought to be gnosis. They are falling to a great extreme. Some assert this, and therefore it is discussed.67
This passage continues up to:
If at such a time there was no thought or appearance of a precious lamp, how could it come to be known as the meditative concentration of the precious lamp?68 It is the same with other meditative concentrations:
they are not without thought because they possess the characteristics of self-perception and are not examples of inanimate emptiness.69
This passage also includes a refutation by logical consequence, which states that in a deep sleep, a state of no thought and no mental activity naturally occurs, and therefore all living beings must be buddhas. Wouldn’t the above passage also refute the meditation tradition of mahāmudrā handed down through the oral transmission?
If this system of meditation has become a tradition not unlike that of Hoshang70 in which nothing is brought to mind, then we must say that it does.
I concur with the words of the great masters who say that the yoga of the mahāmudrā is well known to involve looking at the mind, but that ”mind” refers not to the various transient states of mind but to the primordial mind of clear light.
So what are the meanings of lines such as “abandon all thoughts” and  “in the darkness do not think at all?”71 They mean that during withdrawal, “abandon all thoughts” apart from mental application to the objects of meditation, and “do not think at all.” In his commentary on the lines beginning “meditative absorption destroys the afflictions”72 from the second chapter of the second part of the Hevajra Tantra, Vajragarbha says:
The first of the six yogas is withdrawal, and by withdrawing and meditating, these signs will appear.
Even if there is no wish to enter the perfect path, simply for the sake of a spectacle, focus your mind one-pointedly on the objects for half a month or even for a day and a night.73 Even those who have no wish to enter the perfect path, meaning those who do not strive for such a path, should apply their minds to the objects of meditation for half a month or, if that is not possible, for a day and a night, in order to see the spectacles of empty forms, such as smoke and so forth.
This passage talks of a single-pointed mental application to objects during the withdrawal yoga.
The next verse of the Hevajra Tantra says:
Having abandoned all thoughts, the mind in deity form
unceasingly for a day,
complete the meditation.74 On this verse Vajragarbha says:
If those who lack the fortune to be able to strive in this yoga of no-self for half a month can place their minds one-pointedly on emptiness for even a day, abandoning all other objects of mind, trustworthy signs of the path will appear. These are signs of the withdrawal achieved by withdrawal yoga. Anything other than that is the foolish, in their deluded wisdom, slandering the teaching of the Tathāgata.75 Therefore this passage states that if the mind is placed one-pointedly on the meditation objects of withdrawal, trustworthy signs of the path, such as the empty forms of smoke and so forth, will arise.
“Abandon all thoughts” is explained by the line “abandoning all other objects of mind,” which means to abandon meditation objects other than those of withdrawal yoga.
The Vajragarbha Commentary continues:
Therefore abandoning all thoughts by using meditative concentrations other than those of the concentrations of withdrawal yoga and meditating for a day and night will not produce the trustworthy signs.76 This clearly teaches that abandoning all other thoughts and meditating on the concentrations of withdrawal yoga for a day and a night will produce trustworthy signs. Other meditations will not. The validity of mental placement by mental application to an object This has two outlines: 1.Presenting sources to show its validity 2.The actual placement of mind
Presenting sources to show its validity Verse 115 of the Gnosis chapter, quoted in the Great Commentary, says:
With mind fixed into space, eyes unclosed, the vajra path is entered. From the emptiness
arises smoke, mirage, a clear, uncontaminated light in the sky, and a butter-lamp flame.77 The commentary to this says: Those who practice the yoga in space are in the night, in the darkness of a room with no holes. “With mind fixed into space, eyes unclosed, the vajra path is entered.” Here the winds enter the central channel, and from the total emptiness, the signs of smoke and so forth are seen.
Therefore: “With mind fixed into space, eyes unclosed,
the vajra path is entered. From the emptiness arises smoke, mirage, a clear, uncontaminated light
in the sky, and a butter-lamp flame.” These are seen by the night yoga.78 This passage clearly teaches the objects of meditation during withdrawal yoga, as well as the placement of the mind on those objects in conjunction with the positioning of the eyes.
It also teaches that the winds enter the central channel from that placement of mind and eye position, and that from the winds  entering the central channel, the signs of smoke and so forth appear.
How are these taught?
The lines beginning “the vajra path is entered.
From the emptiness arises smoke” and the ensuing commentary, “Here the winds enter the central channel, and from the total emptiness, the signs of smoke and so forth are seen,” teach that as a result of the vajra activity of the winds entering the central channel, the definitive signs of withdrawal yoga, smoke and so forth, will be seen. However they will not be seen without the winds entering the central channel.
What is the method for bringing the winds into the central channel in this meditation?
The lines from the Condensed Tantra and the Great Commentary, “With mind fixed into space, eyes unclosed, the vajra path is entered” teach the object of meditation to be “space” and that a single-pointed placement of the mind onto that object is the mental placement.
Wherever the mind is placed, there the unclosed eyes are focused. From this the winds will enter the central channel. Furthermore Nāropa in his Commentary to a Short Teaching on Initiations says:
Those who practice the yoga in space are in the night, in the darkness of a room with no holes, with the mind fixed into space, and all thoughts abandoned. There with the mind one-pointedly on emptiness, meditate for a day.
“The eyes unclosed, the vajra path is entered. Here the winds enter the central channel, and from the total emptiness, the signs of smoke and so forth are seen.”79
Cilupa also says:
Focusing on space, look into space;
the five signs, smoke and so forth, will appear. The Kālacakrapāda Transmission states:
At night and without cover,
focus on space, meditate on the emptiness.81
These and other Indian texts on the same topic and their commentaries have explained the object of withdrawal meditation as taught in the phrase “the mind fixed into space” from the tantra and commentary as being an “empty space.” This emptiness is mentioned in the second summary of the Realms chapter of the Great Commentary:
To accomplish this, the meditation on mahāmudrā, the path of the signs of smoke and so forth are clearly taught:
“The mind one-pointedly into emptiness,
meditate thoroughly for a day.”82 This explains that an emptiness is the object of meditation. Similarly, in the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary, it says:
Therefore, abandoning thoughts of existence and nonexistence, with no grasping, meditate on the deep nonapprehended emptiness. The yogi will then see the arising of the signs of smoke and so forth.83 Ācārya Anupamarakṣita’s commentary is similar to this:
Therefore, abandoning thoughts of existence and nonexistence, with no support, meditate on the deep nonapprehended emptiness.84 The meaning of these quotes on emptiness will be explained later.
When explaining the meaning of the lines beginning “the mind fixed into space,” the commentary on Anupamarakṣita’s six yogas says:
“Night” means darkness.
“The mind fixed into space” means that the mind draws toward space and becomes of one taste with it.
Entering into the vajra path, the winds reach the avadhūtī.85 This explains that space is the object of meditation.
In that case, space and emptiness, both explained as being the objects of meditation during withdrawal yoga, must be synonymous. Therefore a space that is the mere lack of any obstruction and obscuration, an emptiness with no material support, is the meditation object of withdrawal yoga.
How is the mind to be placed in such a state? The actual placement of mind This is under two headings:
1.The assertions of previous Tibetan masters
2.The assertion of Jé Tsongkhapa and the proof of its validity
The assertions of previous Tibetan masters
The omniscient Butön asserts that the eyes are focused into the space of a darkened room directly in front of the point midway between the eyebrows.
The mind also is one-pointedly focused on the emptiness that is the space of the darkened room upon which the eyes are positioned.
Without wandering to anything else, and without any other thoughts whatsoever, the mind is released into this state.86 The Jonang and their followers mention many ways in which the mind is held still by the “three nonmovements.” However, in each method, the mind is one-pointedly focused onto the external place where the eyes have been positioned in the space of a darkened room.
These two assertions seem to take the meaning of “empty space” as taught by the phrase “the mind fixed into space,”  and other phrases from the tantra and its commentaries, to refer to an external emptiness within a darkened room. Those who hold these positions must differentiate between the practices here in Kālacakra, with their ability to bring the winds into the central channel by mental placement on various points of the body, and the practices in the Perfection Vehicle and three lower tantras, where no amount of mental placement will bring the winds into the central channel. The assertion of Jé Tsongkhapa and the proof of its validity
As explained previously, withdrawal yoga is a practice in which the winds must enter the central channel.
For beginners there are three methods of bringing the winds into the central channel: using an external mudrā consort to awaken the practice of prāṇāyāma, the wind yoga practices of highest tantra, and thirdly, penetrative focusing upon the points of the vajra body.
The last method involves the centers of the six cakras and the upper and lower openings of the central channel, which are entrances through which the winds enter the dhūtī and are therefore locations of penetrative focusing.
This practice is accomplished by the mind being placed single-pointedly on those places and held there without distraction.
With the mind placed on these points, the winds will also gather there, because mind and wind engage similarly.
Which method is used here to bring the winds into the central channel?
The emptiness and space explained as being the object of mental focus by the tantra, the Three Bodhisattva Commentaries, and the above Indian texts and commentaries refers to the empty space of the cylindrical hole that is the upper opening of the central channel located internally between the eyebrows. The mind is placed one-pointedly on this space, and all other thoughts on all other objects are abandoned.
This placement of mind is what the lines “Having abandoned all thoughts” and “the mind one-pointedly into emptiness, meditate totally for a day” are referring to.
How can we know that the emptiness and space spoken of in the tantra and commentaries in this section refer to the space that is the cylindrical hole of the upper opening of the central channel?
I will explain.
In keeping with the Great Commentary statement “Tantras will be understood from other tantras,”87 the Rigi Ārāli Tantra says:
The eyes are not open, not closed,
mind is placed between the eyebrows;
in the medium of total darkness,
initially the yogi sees.88
The first line describes the position of the eyes.
The second teaches how the mind is placed upon an object, and the last two lines explain how the signs will arise. Between the eyebrows, or in the center of the eyebrows, is where the upper opening of the central channel is found, and the placement of the mind described in this verse means that the mind is held there.
Furthermore the Root Tantra, quoted in the Great Commentary on verse 110 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
The great mudrā of withdrawal
has the characteristics of empty space.
At that tip the mind is solely placed.
In the black line, last of the signs, meditate on inanimate and animate
in all their variety.89
This clearly teaches that the mind is to be placed in the space of the empty interior of the central channel.
The mind meditating on withdrawal yoga, which is characterized by the mind being single-pointedly placed into empty space, is single-pointedly and exclusively placed in the empty space “at that tip.” This produces the signs of smoke and so forth, the last of which is a hair-sized black line, in which the yogi meditates vividly on all the various prognostic mirrorlike animate and inanimate phenomena.
The verse says that the mind is to be placed in the empty space at a “tip.”90 On that tip the Root Tantra says:
This śaṅkhinī is the great mudrā,
spoken of as caṇḍālī.
Above the navel Lakṣmī,
the avadhūtī, the human tip.91
Here the avadhūtī is referred to as a “tip.” Therefore the first quote teaches that during withdrawal yoga, the mind is to be focused upon a tip, and the second quote explains that tip to be the dhūtī.
This clearly indicates that the mind is to be focused on the dhūtī. That this tip refers to the upper tip will be explained later.
Furthermore the Condensed Tantra says: With the mind fixed into space, the eyes unclosed, the vajra path is entered And the commentary on this says: Here the winds enter the central channel, and from the total emptiness, the signs of smoke and so forth are seen.
This teaches the necessity of the winds entering the central channel as the immediate cause of seeing the signs of smoke and so forth.
The commentary continues: Therefore, with the mind fixed into space, the eyes unclosed, the vajra path is entered. From the emptiness arises smoke, mirage…92
This clearly teaches that both the mind fixed into space and the unclosed eyes bring the winds into the avadhūtī, or vajra path, through which the signs of smoke and so forth will arise from the emptiness.
Therefore it also explains that “space” in the phrase “the mind fixed into space” is the space of the emptiness that is the inside of the central channel and that the mind is placed one-pointedly in it.
Assuming that the space and emptiness spoken of in this section on mental placement in withdrawal yoga do refer to the emptiness that is the inside of the central channel, how is it proven that this refers to the upper opening of the central channel?
The verse quoted above that runs “The eyes are not open, not closed, / mind is placed between the eyebrows”93 refers to the space that is the emptiness of the central channel’s inner hollow, whose upper opening lies directly at the point midway between the eyebrows.
Moreover the Great Commentary says on verse 120 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter:
In the phrase “The look of Vighnantaka,”94 Vighnantaka means amṛtavarta.95 His look “reaches the place of nectar,” which means reaching the brow.
The look of Vighnantaka reaches the place of nectar, and by this, near accomplishment of the six branches will be achieved. The word “also” refers to prāṇāyāma and retention. “Having seen the forms of the winds” refers to near accomplishment.96 This passage clearly refers to the upper opening of the central channel.
The commentary says that the Vighnantaka of the root text quote, “The look of Vighnantaka,” refers to amṛtavarta, and that “the place of nectar” refers to the brow.
“His look” means “his reach.” In other words the look of Vighnantaka reaches the brow or place of nectar.
Withdrawal and meditative absorption have already been explained as being the branch of approximation, and the words “by this” mean that by the accomplishment of the branch of approximation, which involves the mind being placed at or reaching the upper opening of the dhūtī within the brow, or place of nectar, meditate “also” upon the  practices of prāṇāyāma and retention in the branch of near accomplishment.
Seeing the images of the winds refers to near accomplishment.
This passage from the Great Commentary talks of a mental placement, which involves the place of nectar, or the brow. This particular mental placement is not that of prāṇāyāma and retention, which means it can be none other than that of withdrawal and absorption. The yoga of meditative absorption is a stabilizing of withdrawal, and therefore this passage is an establishment of withdrawal mental placement.
Therefore the line from the root text and commentary, “Approximation is the first yoga, of ten aspects, with the look of wrathful Cakrī,” describes the positioning of the eyes during the yoga of withdrawal.
The line “The look of Vighnantaka reaches the path of nectar” refers to the positioning of the eyes during withdrawal yoga as well as the focus of the mind. The word “also” indicates that with the attainment of the withdrawal and absorption branch of approximation, the near-accomplishment branch of the six yogas, prāṇāyāma and retention, is also to be practiced.
Some say that the term amṛtavarta as mentioned here does not refer to the branch of approximation, because a verse from the Later Guhyasamāja in the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary and in Nāropa’s Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations links the appearance of amṛtavarta with the practice of near accomplishment:
During near accomplishment,
the image of amṛtavarta.97
There is no contradiction here. The amṛtavarta that has been described as “The look of Vighnantaka” and so forth has been explained as referring to the brow.
The amṛtavarta mentioned in the Later Guhyasamāja verse, “During near accomplishment, the image of amṛtavarta,“98 which appears in the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary and is quoted by Nāropa, is explained by both these commentaries as provisional language referring to the winds. Therefore this verse is referring to the winds as being the meditative object during the prāṇāyāma and retention yogas, the near-accomplishment branch of the six yogas.
The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary, when explaining the lines “during near accomplishment,” says:
“The image of amṛtavarta“ refers to the winds by way of provisional language.
Furthermore the Buddha spoke similarly of the “five aspects” in the Later Guhyasamāja, where he says, “Breath, the nature of the five jewels.”
Nāropa also reproduces these words from the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary, and when explaining the line “The look of Vighnantaka” in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations, he mirrors the words of the Great Commentary:
Vighnantaka in the line “The look of Vighnantaka” refers to amṛtavarta.
His “look” reaches the place of nectar, which means reaching the brow.
By this the near accomplishment of the six branches will be achieved. The word “also” refers to prāṇāyāma and retention.99 Likewise the Kālacakrapāda Transmission clearly states that the brow is the location of penetrative focusing:
Life wind is brought to the drop at the brow;
meditate when the wind on the right flows.100 Furthermore, in Avadhūtipa’s Opening the Eyes to What Is Hidden, it says: The manner is as follows:
the eyes are not closed, the mouth is open, breath is natural, there is no holding to phenomena, nothing that grasps and nothing to be grasped, the breath entering and dwelling within the deep channel between the eyebrows.
This is the stance of that wrathful one.
Similarly those who practice to accomplish the yoga must adopt a similar stance, and the five signs of the night yoga will arise.101 “The deep channel between the eyebrows” mentioned during the positioning of the eyes in withdrawal yoga refers to the dhūtī between the eyebrows, and this passage teaches that the practitioner of the nighttime yoga must meditate on the breath entering at that point.
This establishes that the focus of the mind, which brings the winds with it, must also be at this point. To summarize: The eyes half covered by the eyelids look upward to the point midway between the eyebrows, to the opening of the upper tip of the central channel in the space of its empty aperture. The eyeballs are rolled up toward the inner corners of the eyes. Together with the mind these half-closed eyes are one-pointedly focused, and they do not move at all from this position.
This is the placement of the eyes.
Likewise the mind dwells within the emptiness that is the space of the empty aperture of the upper tip of the central channel and is held there in single-pointed equipoise.
This is the placement of the mind.
This validates the placement of the eyes and mind and the way the winds enter the central channel in dependence on that placement, as taught by Jé Tsongkhapa: Know that withdrawal and meditative absorption gather winds into the upper opening of avadhūtī.102 However, in his Six Yogas, the great dharma master Butön says:
Holding the previous position of the eyes, with eyeballs unmoving, eyelashes not fluttering, and the eyes looking at one place, the entrances of the right and left channels that carry the flow of conceptual winds are blocked.
By this restriction the winds, which rise and flow through the eyes, together with the eye consciousness, are halted. By this restriction the mind is held, which in turn halts the other senses.103
The meaning of this passage seems to be that by positioning the eyes, the winds, which act as mounts for the five sense consciousnesses, will enter the central channel, and the signs will arise.
This also appears to be his understanding of the following verse from Anupamarakṣita:
When the half eyes are firmly placed upon the pure space, smoke and so forth will nonconceptually appear
from the nonconceptual consciousness of great bliss and emptiness.104
Furthermore, regarding placement of the mind in the same Six Yogas, dharma master Butön said:
Within the state of this previous positioning of the eyes and physical posture, all grasping to existence, nonexistence, and so forth will be destroyed. One relaxes into an uncontrived state and dwells within nonapprehension.105
As a source for this assertion, he quotes the Vajrapāṇi Commentary:
Therefore, abandoning all perception of existence and nonexistence, not grasping, meditate on the profound nonapprehended emptiness.106 Therefore he also asserts this meditation to be one on actual emptiness.
The Vajragarbha Commentary also talks of “this yoga of nonself” and “placing the mind one-pointedly in emptiness,”107 and although he seems to think that this is the meaning of these quotes and of “meditate on the profound nonapprehended emptiness” from the Vajrapāṇi Commentary, I cannot see this assertion as being correct.
For a mental placement in which all grasping to existence, nonexistence, and so forth is eliminated,  the mind released into an uncontrived state, is not a meditation on the nature of reality.108 Even assuming that it were, it could not be a nonaspected emptiness meditation at this time in the practice of withdrawal.
Practitioners of this path need a mere understanding of emptiness produced by listening and contemplating, even at the time of requesting initiation, but the time for its primary meditation is during the two yogas of prāṇāyāma and retention, when mastery is gained over the winds, and the caṇḍālī fire blazes within the dhūtī to melt the elements and produce the great bliss. This bliss takes nonaspected emptiness as its object of meditation to develop a similar-in-type cause of dharmakāya.
However, here in the yogas of withdrawal and absorption, the meditations are on empty forms, either by creating them anew or stabilizing those already produced in order to develop similar-in-type causes of the enlightened form body. In that case, it may be wondered what the meaning of this passage from the Vajrapāṇi Commentary is?
Therefore, abandoning all perception of existence and nonexistence, not grasping, meditate on the profound, nonapprehended emptiness, and the yogi will see the signs of smoke and so forth arise.109
The meaning of this passage is similar to that given previously on the line, “Having abandoned all thoughts.” Having abandoned all perception of objects existing and nonexisting, except for those of withdrawal meditation, there will be no grasping to those existing and nonexisting objects. Focusing and meditating on the  previously described meditation objects of withdrawal will bring about the profound nature of the path of withdrawal, which is the “nonapprehended emptiness,” endowed with every supreme aspect.
How does this occur?
“The yogi will see the signs of smoke and so forth arise.”
Moreover Nāropa, in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations, with an explanation of the meaning of these Great Commentary words in mind, clearly says: Therefore, abandoning perception of existence and nonexistence, with no support, the signs of the profound, nonapprehended emptiness will arise. The yogi meditates for the arising of the signs of smoke and so forth.110 The meaning of this passage is similar to others quoted previously.
“With no support” means no material or objective support but having instead a focus of empty space, as previously described.
Similarly Anupamarakṣita says in his Six Yogas:
Therefore, abandoning thoughts of existence and nonexistence, with no support, meditate on the deep nonapprehended emptiness, and signs of verification will occur.
The signs of verification are those of smoke and so forth, and the yogi meditates upon these.111
Also Sūryaśrī in Filled with Good Qualities says:
The meditation on emptiness is a perception of fully aspected emptiness.
“Night” refers to darkness. “Day” refers to light.112 Therefore “profound, nonapprehended emptiness” and so on should be understood as referring to an emptiness endowed with every supreme aspect developed during the actualization of the path of withdrawal.
Likewise the lines “this yoga of nonself” and “placing the mind one-pointedly in emptiness” from the Vajragarbha Commentary113 are also referring to an empty form that is the very path of withdrawal.
This is so because the empty form endowed with every supreme aspect belongs to the wisdom category of method and wisdom, and so it is referred to as “this yoga of nonself” and so forth. This explanation of the above topics is the definitive meaning of these words from the Great Commentary, and those whose explanations are to accord with the thinking of Jé Tsongkhapa should definitely explain them in this way. The signs of meditative accomplishment and their appearance This is under two headings: 1.Descriptions in the tantra and commentary and in Indian texts
2.Summarized description of how the signs arise
Descriptions in the tantra and commentary and in Indian texts
A Short Teaching on Initiations states:
With all conceptuality abandoned,
smoke, mirage, fireflies,
and the flame of a butter lamp arise.114 The Condensed Tantra says: From the emptiness arises smoke, mirage, a clear uncontaminated appearance within space,
and a butter-lamp flame.115 On this the Great Commentary says: “From the emptiness arises smoke, mirage, a clear uncontaminated appearance within space, a butter-lamp flame.” These are seen by the night yoga.116 These four signs, therefore, are described as being night signs. As for their scriptural source, the Great Commentary says:
Of the ten signs, those of the night are found in the Guhya samāja and others.117 “Others” refers to the Vajra Tent Tantra.
Therefore the Great Commentary teaches that the night signs are spoken of in these two tantras.
The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary also speaks of the night signs as coming from the Later Guhyasamāja Tantra and the Vajra Tent Tantra:
Smoke is the first sign, mirage the second, lights in the sky the third, a lamp the fourth, and the clarity of a cloudless sky is the fifth.
These are spoken of by the Buddha in the Later Guhyasamāja and the Dakinī Vajra Tent.118 In the Later Guhyasamāja Tantra itself, these signs are taught as follows:
To the mind of vajra cessation,
signs, closely held, will appear.
These signs are of five kinds,
Bodhivajra119 has explained.
The first is the form of a mirage,
the second that of smoke,
third is light in the sky,
fourth is a burning lamp,
and fifth is a constant clarity,
like a cloudless sky.120
In accord with the Later Guhyasamāja, A Short Teaching on the Views of Mañjuśrī also states:
Meditate on signs of reliability:
the first the form of a mirage,
the second is like smoke,
the third, fireflies,
the fourth, like a lamp,
the fifth is a constant clarity,
like a cloudless sky.121 These lines list the signs as they are spoken of in the Guhyasamāja.
The text continues with the lines “Arising from space, self-arising,”122 and so on, which is a description of the signs taken from the Saṃgīti.123 After these lines the order of signs as listed in the Kālacakra are quoted:
Smoke, mirage, fireflies, lamp alit, moon and sun,
darkness, great drops,
various forms, and clear light;
with eyes closed and unclosed,
in the emptiness, not imputed,
dreamlike forms are seen.
Meditate constantly on these forms. In the Guhyasamāja the miragelike sign comes first.
Here in the Kālacakra the smokelike sign is said to be the first. Is this not a contradiction?
In order to resolve this, some say that there is no contradiction, because the Guhyasamāja quote is taught with its deep meaning hidden and is, therefore interpretative, whereas here the meaning is taught clearly and openly and is therefore definitive.
It appears they think this is the meaning of a passage from Nāropa’s Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations, which is their authority for their assertion:
“Signs, closely held, will appear” means that the signs of smoke and so on closely held will appear very clearly.
The reversal of the first and second signs is due to the teachings of the gurus.124
However this is not a correct resolution of the contradiction.
Meditative practices that follow such texts as the Five Stages and the Oral Tradition of Mañjuśrī,125 which teach according to the thinking of Guhyasamāja, will produce the miragelike sign first. This has been verified by the experiences of the great siddhas, such as Nāgārjuna, who have recorded them literally in the great Indian texts.
Nāropa also, while commenting on the Later Guhyasamāja, is writing literally when he says that the miragelike sign is the first.
The smokelike sign arising first, as described in the Kālacakra withdrawal, is also established by the actual experience of Kālacakra withdrawal practitioners and is presented in the tantra and commentary accordingly. To summarize:
different traditions of practice mean that signs arise in different orders.
The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says:
From the instructions of the guru, the yogi who practices in the space of night first sees smoke, not a mirage. This will be known from his experience.
After that comes the mirage.126
This passage explicitly teaches that when the six yogas of the Short Guhyasamāja are practiced according to Kālacakra, the instructions of the guru are given in accordance with Kālacakra, from which “the yogi who practices in the space of night first sees smoke,  not a mirage.” Furthermore “this will be known from his own experience.” Implicitly it teaches that when the six yogas of the Short Guhyasamāja are practiced according to the Oral Tradition of Mañjuśrī and Bright Lamp, the yogi, by following the instructions of the guru, will know from his own experience that “first comes the mirage, not the smoke,” after which comes the smoke.
This has to be the way to understand it, because the above commentary passages refer to the verses of the Later Guhyasamāja and the Vajra Tent in order to dispel any doubts concerning the sources for the night signs.
If it were not the case that different signs appear first depending on the tradition of practice, and if the teaching of the mirage appearing first was solely a provisional teaching, then that fact would have been mentioned in the commentary. Instead it says, “This will be known from his experience.”
Furthermore, Sūryaśrī in his Filled with Good Qualities says:
Other tantras say “first the miragelike.” It should be understood therefore that the order is reversed.127
Therefore the description in the Guhyasamāja of the mirage as the first sign reverses the order of the tradition that begins with the smokelike sign.
He goes on to explain the reasons for this reversal:
This can be understood from the instructions of the holy guru, the extensive commentary of the bodhisattva, and from one’s own experience.128
This means the teaching that the first sign is the mirage followed by smoke has to be reversed here. This is due to the instructions of the holy gurus on the six yogas being taught according to the Kālacakra.
By practicing these instructions as taught by the gurus, the smokelike sign arising first followed by the miragelike sign will be known from one’s own experience. This can also be known from Stainless Light, “the extensive commentary of the bodhisattva” Puṇḍarīka. Therefore, when the six yogas of the Later Guhyasamāja are practiced according to a guru’s teachings in keeping with the Kālacakra,  the first sign will be smoke followed by the mirage. The commentary continues with an explanation of the arising of the signs in accord with their actual presentation in the Later Guhyasamāja:
Primarily the five signs, of the nature of the five pure elements, are to be understood as being those of the Guhyasamāja Tantra and others. This is so because the text also talks of the element of space.129 Therefore, beginning with the mirage, the five signs are explained as being the signs of the elements dissolving into each other. Applying that to the Guhyasamāja, the commentary continues:
In the eighteenth chapter it states, “Water, fire, air, earth, and space, all of these.” These are similar in form and aspect to those of the bodhisattva.130
This is the topic to be explained.
The explanation follows: Earth absorbs into water from which arises the mirage.
Water sinks into fire from which arises the smoke.
Fire is absorbed into air from which arise lights in the sky.
The appearance of the three subtle elements is like the appearance of a lamp in space and is therefore known as the sign of the lamp.
From the sinking of that appearance arises a constant appearance like the cloud-free sky, known as the cloudless sky–like sign. These are the five signs.131 The commentary then provides the source for this explanation:
First earth goes into water.
Water goes into fire,
fire sinks into air,
air enters consciousness,
consciousness, the apprehending,
enters the clear light.132
Therefore it is acceptable to explain the Guhyasamāja‘s assertion of the mirage as being the first sign as a literal explanation and, moreover, they are the signs of the elements progressively dissolving.
Similarly, the commentary continues:
The Net of Illusion Tantra says that by the daytime yoga, the six signs having the nature of the six pure aggregates arise from the element of space.
The glorious Mahārāja Primordial Buddha Tantra primarily speaks of ten signs having the nature of the purified method and wisdom of the senses and their objects.133
This means that the four signs of the progressive dissolution of the elements as found in  the Guhyasamāja are similar to the four night signs of the Kālacakra and therefore are explained as night signs.
The six signs of the six purified aggregates as spoken of in the Net of Illusion Tantra are similar to the six daytime signs of the Kālacakra and are therefore explained as daytime signs.
However the nature of the ten signs from Kālacakra is that of purified method and wisdom: the five sense objects, form and so forth, are wisdom, and the five sense organs, eyes and so forth, are method.
These ten types of purified method and wisdom arise from the ten winds entering the central channel.
These ten winds consist of apprehending winds and apprehended winds. At the heart are located the five winds that move the five sense consciousnesses to the five sense objects.
These engage objects in dependence upon the five sense organs. Also at the heart are the five enhancing and clarifying winds of the five sense objects of form and so forth. These winds clarify and enhance forms, sound, and so forth. These ten winds are stopped from flowing into the right and left channels and to the sense-organ entrances and instead enter the dhūtī. This halts the activity between the five senses and five sense objects, thereby bringing about the appearance of the ten signs.
Verse 116 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter also conveys this meaning:
In withdrawal within the body, the ten subjects and objects are not engaged.134
The Great Commentary on this verse says: Withdrawal means that within the body, consciousness is not engaged in the connection between the ten subjects and objects. The five, eyes and so forth, are engaged in empty-form objects.135
These apprehending and apprehended winds are spoken of in the Vajra Garland Explanatory Tantra:
Within the heart, the light of bliss, the illuminating light of the Buddha sun,
the apprehending and apprehension of form:
these the ten rays of light.
Expanding light, rays of light, brilliance,
the illuminating and shining, the shining light:
they apprehend external form by way of the eyes and so forth.
Light, luminosity,
illuminatingly beautiful, illuminating light, illuminating sun:
these in aspects of external form.136 The first five winds are called expanding light and so forth.
The second five are called light and so forth and are in the aspect of “objects.” Summarized description of how the signs arise
When the yogi has developed some concentration from a correct practice of mental placement, posture, and eye positioning as previously explained, the position of the eyes will cause the winds that move the eye consciousness to its objects to stiffen and withdraw.
The winds that move the other sense consciousnesses to their objects will do the same.
At this time the connection between sense and sense object is broken, and various signs will appear. However these are not the actual signs of withdrawal.
Then the apprehending and apprehended winds along with other winds that flow though the nostrils will enter the central channel. At that time various appearances arise, and the way they arise can be understood from the instruction texts composed by the masters. The winds flowing equally though both nostrils indicates that the winds are flowing in the central channel. This ensures the appearance of definitive signs.
However, in ordinary existence, 675 breaths flow through the central channel every day, and therefore the winds merely entering the central channel is no guarantee that signs will arise.
However, when the winds are definitely flowing equally through both nostrils through the force of practice, with the body, eyes, and mind positioned and placed, the winds will have entered the central channel through the power of meditation.
From the ten winds entering the dhūtī, the night signs will arise.
The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says:
“Signs” refers to the appearances that are like clouds, smoke, and so forth. Those ending with the lamp are seen first.137 The commentary Filled with Qualities also says:
Concerning “smoke” and so forth: pervading everything inside and out, a smokelike empty-aspect appearance arises. Here too a cloudlike appearance arises without hindrance.
As it is taught, first comes the cloudlike appearance, then the smokelike.138
In the above passages the first sign is the cloud-like, the second is the smoke-like, followed by the mirage-like, firefly-like, lamp-like, and a vacuity like a clear sky.
Although the signs are presented this way, here in the section on night signs the  cloud-like sign and the cloudless sky–like sign are not included.
The above quote states, “everything inside and out is pervaded by a smoke-like appearance,” meaning that when the four signs first appear, they seem to pervade everything inside and outside the body. Later, as one’s meditational development becomes more stable, the signs appear within the dhūtī.
The Great Commentary on verse 121 of the Gnosis chapter clearly says:
Here, initially, the yogi places the winds in the central channel, by which he will see the signs within the avadhūtī.139
The first sign gradually appears in the form of blue wisps of smoke. Nothing else is seen.
After that a bluish shimmering miragelike appearance occurs.
When that has cleared, the fireflies sign arises.
After that the form of a flame appears.
After that has cleared, a vacuity will dawn, resembling a completely clear sky.
With each successive meditation on the objects of withdrawal yoga, the winds enter the central channel, and the signs will gradually but definitely appear in the dhūtī. When that occurs the nighttime signs are complete, and from this point onward the yogi enters the daytime yoga. Some instruction texts, thinking it to be the position of Jé Tsongkhapa, say that for the signs of withdrawal yoga to arise, the winds must enter, abide, and dissolve within the central channel. This is not the position of Jé Tsongkhapa. Notes taken by discerning disciples on Jé Tsongkhapa’s actual words on the six yogas reveal that the night signs arise from the winds merely entering the dhūtī.
The day signs do not appear from the winds merely entering the dhūtī but arise from a special way of entering.
Śavaripa also says:
By the ten winds entering the dhūtī,
the day and night signs will be seen,
this is the branch of withdrawal.140 These lines say that the signs arise from the winds entering the central channel but say nothing about the winds abiding and dissolving there.
The tantra and commentary says:
“The vajra path is entered.” Here the winds enter the central channel, and from the total emptiness the signs of smoke and so forth are seen.141 Many similar quotes state that the signs of smoke and so on arise from the winds entering the central channel, but nowhere is there a passage that talks of the winds having to abide and dissolve.
Reliable Indian texts also talk of the signs arising from the winds entering the dhūtī but say nothing of the winds having to abide and dissolve.
For example:142
By the three unmoving,
the ten winds enter the dhūtī,
outer and inner conceiving is halted, and the signs arise; this is the branch of individual cutting. Withdrawal: Day Yoga
Daytime yoga meditations This has five outlines:
1.Place of meditation 2.Posture 3.Positioning the eyes 4.Mental placement 5.The development of the signs
Place of meditation Verse 116 of the Gnosis chapter says: Into pure cloudless space the yogi should look with eyes wide open.143
On this line the commentary says: This is the daytime yoga. Into pure cloudless space the yogi should look with eyes wide open. This is in the morning and evening with the back to the sun.
Otherwise the rays of the sun will bedazzle and cause harm.144 This passage says that the place of meditation should afford an expansive view of cloudless skies.
Therefore one should be under the overhang of a house or on a mountain spur surrounded by a wall that prevents others from looking in.
There, under the vast expanse of the cloudless sky, where no water or snow is in the line of vision, where the eyes are not exposed to the wind and to the glare of the sun, one should meditate.
The text advises facing west in the morning and east in the evening. Lamas of the past have said that the same criteria apply when facing the intermediate directions.
Furthermore this description of the place of meditation from the tantra and commentary is found in Essence of the Three Yogas:
Free of clouds, in the clear sky,
in the morning back to the sun,
in the evening likewise.
The midday sun will harm the eyes, therefore leave the meditation.145
The second, third, and fourth outlines on the posture and so on are as described in the nighttime yoga.
Some say, “It is not correct to maintain that the positioning of the eyes in day yoga is the same as that of the night yoga because in the above quote it says, ‘Into pure cloudless space the yogi should look with eyes wide open.’ Therefore the eyes are open wide and look into a cloudless sky.
In nighttime yoga you have described the positioning of the eyes as being on the space that is the opening at the upper tip of the central channel. For such a positioning it would make no sense to talk of clouds or lack of clouds.” There is no contradiction.
The positioning of the eyes for both day and night yogas must be the same. The Great Commentary, on verse 119 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
“Cakrī” means Uṣṇīṣa. “With his wrathful look” means the yogi sits with eyes not closed, looking upward, and the signs will appear. These are the four of the night yoga and the six of the day yoga.146 This teaches that “eyes not closed and looking upward” is the common position of the eyes for both day and night yogas.
I have explained and established by scripture and reason the positioning of the eyes for the night yoga.
The line “look with eyes wide open” will be explained later. In his writings the omniscient dharma master Butön says:
The way of looking, the actions, the bindings, and the mental placement on the object of meditation is similar to the previous.
One difference is that the mind is projected  into the sphere of cloud-free space, not traveling to or distracted by surrounding objects but one-pointedly held in meditation.147
As a source for this assertion the passage beginning “This is the daytime yoga.
Into pure cloudless space” is quoted.
He is asserting that the positioning of the eyes is similar to that of the night yoga but that there is a difference in the mental placement, as taught by the commentary words “pure cloudless space.” It appears he asserts this “space” to be external cloudless space.
Moreover many Tibetan lamas teach that this “space” refers to the positioning of the eyes and is external space. This appears to be an important subject for discussion, and I will explain the thinking of the tantra and commentary as I understand it.
When entering the day yoga, meditation is first performed with the eye positioning, posture, and mental placement of the night yoga.
This will produce the signs of smoke and so forth, which ensures a continuation into the quick appearance of the day signs.
The way this happens is as follows. At the end of the four nighttime signs, a totally pure and cloudless space–like appearance arises and appears to the yogi, who looks into it with wide-open celestial eyes or with fleshly eyes. From such a totally pure and cloudless space–like appearance come the six day signs of the blazing and so forth.
Therefore, in the quote, “Into pure cloudless space the yogi should look with eyes wide open,” “space” must refer to the cloudless space–like appearance that occurs after the four signs of smoke and so forth have arisen, and the “eyes” that are wide open must refer to either celestial eyes or fleshly eyes.
This is so because when meditating on the day yoga, the first appearance is that of the cloudless space that follows on from the last of the four nighttime signs.
Immediately after that comes the appearance of the daytime signs.
Moreover, during that spacelike appearance, it would make no sense to say that we look at it with the ordinary ripened eyes we possess now, because from the moment the first of the four night signs of smoke and so forth arise, the subject and object connection necessary for  engaging in external form is broken. Some might reply:
“If it could be established that in the practice of daytime yoga meditation, the four signs of smoke and so forth arise first, followed by the cloudless space–like appearance, and then finally the day signs, then it would be as you assert.
But where is the scriptural evidence to prove that in the daytime yoga meditation, first the four signs of smoke and so forth arise, followed by the cloudless space–like appearance, and then immediately by the day signs?”
This scriptural evidence is very important and will be explained extensively.
The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says:
Here “self-blessing” refers to withdrawal, wherein conventional emptiness is seen.
“Signs” refers to the appearances that are like clouds, smoke, and so forth. Those ending with the lamp are seen first.
Then comes a totally pure cloudless space.
In other tantras are  found other signs, such as blazing and so forth, ending with drops. These six signs are spoken of by the Buddha in the Net of Meditative Concentration chapter of the Net of Illusion Tantra:
“Self-created, created from space,
the great fire of wisdom knowledge,
the great light illuminating,
the brilliance of gnosis,
“a lamp for beings, a lamp of wisdom,
great radiance and clear light,
greatest of knowledge, mighty secret,
the king of secret mantra, accomplisher of great purpose.”148 With these two verses in the Net of Illusion Tantra, the Buddha speaks of the signs using provisional language.
The appearances that arise from the previously mentioned cloudless space arise from a mind totally devoid of conceptuality and therefore is “Self-created, created from space.” Here the great fire of wisdom knowledge is the appearance of “blazing.”149
Scriptural evidence is clearly presented in this passage.
The passage from “Here, ‘self-blessing’” up to “Then comes a totally pure cloudless space” describes how the night signs are presented in the Vajra Tent Tantra.
From “In other tantras are found other signs” up to “using a provisional language” describes how the day signs are taught in the Net of Meditative Concentration chapter of the Net of Illusion Tantra.
The phrase “the previously mentioned cloudless space” in the next sentence refers to the cloudless space of “a totally pure cloudless space” mentioned in the description of the night signs.
The “appearances” in the line “the appearances that arise from the previously mentioned cloudless space” are the day signs of blazing and so forth.
The appearance of the day signs of blazing and so forth arise from “a mind totally devoid of conceptuality” in its cloudless space–like aspect, hence the line, “Self-created, created from space.” To what does this line refer?
This is answered by the lines “the great fire of gnosis” and so forth, which are lines spoken “using provisional language,” and therefore “Here, the great fire of wisdom knowledge is the appearance of ‘blazing.’” This is the meaning of the passage.
The “cloudless space” explained in this passage on the night signs, “‘The fourth a burning lamp, the fifth a constant clarity, like a cloudless sky.’ Then the form of fire, preceded by an appearance similar to that of cloudless space” is a cloudless space determined as arising after smoke, mirage, fireflies, and lamp have appeared in that order.
On top of that “The previously mentioned cloudless space” refers to the space in the line “Then comes a totally pure cloudless space,” and immediately after the spacelike appearance of “The previously mentioned cloudless space,” the day signs of blazing and so forth appear.
This therefore establishes that in the meditation on the day yoga, the day signs will appear immediately after the four preceding night signs and after the cloudless space, which itself is like a night sign. Furthermore Nāropa in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations says:
In the glorious Guhyasamāja and others, the first and second are taught in reverse order:
“To the mind of vajra cessation
signs, closely held, will appear.
The first is the form of a mirage,
the second that of smoke,
the third is light in the sky,
the fourth a burning lamp,
the fifth a constant clarity,
like a cloudless sky.”
Then the form of fire, preceded by an appearance similar to that of cloudless space, blazes in the form of an empty appearance.
This continues up to “Appearing in the form of a moon mandala,” and immediately after that the commentary states:
These six signs arise from cloudless space–like appearance. Therefore this is the day yoga and the yoga “without cover.”150 This passage also clearly teaches that by meditating on the day yoga, the signs of smoke and so on up to the cloudless space–like appearance are deliberately produced initially, after which the day signs of blazing and so forth arise from that very cloudless space–like appearance.
Similarly Filled with Good Qualities says:
After the Guhyasamāja has explained the signs beginning with the mirage up to the cloudless space–like appearance, it talks of an empty form–like fire blazing out of the cloudless space–like appearance.151
This is similar to Nāropa’s descriptions. The Great Commentary also says: Then the yogi looks into the cloudless space, and from that space, the “self-created, created from space” of the yoga of daytime.152
“Space” in the above line “Then the yogi looks into the cloudless space” has to be the cloudless space–like appearance that arises  after the four signs of smoke and so forth have appeared, because “from that space, the ‘self-created, created from space’ of the yoga of daytime” explains that this “space” is the space of “self-created, created from space,” and the space of “self-created, created from space” is spoken of in the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary as being the cloudless space–like appearance that arises after the appearance of the four signs of smoke and so forth.
What are these celestial eyes and fleshly eyes that look upon the cloudless space–like appearance that arises in day-yoga meditation following the appearance of the four signs from smokelike to lamplike?
First of all, by meditating on the objects of meditation in withdrawal yoga, the winds enter the central channel, the connection between sensory subjects and objects are cut, and then, when the signs of smoke and so forth first arise, they are seen by celestial eyes or fleshly eyes that exist in the mind of the yogi.
The Great Commentary says:
With tathāgata fleshly eyes one first sees the appearances within one’s own mind.153
On verse 116 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, the Great Commentary says:
“Withdrawal” means that within the body, consciousness is unengaged in the connection between the ten subjects and objects. Five other eyes and so forth are engaged in empty-form objects.154 Here “other eyes” refers to fleshly eyes. The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary also states:
Here in withdrawal the five sense organs do not engage the five sense consciousnesses in the external objects, such as form. The celestial sense organs engage the celestial sense consciousnesses in inner objects.155
The fleshly eyes also will arise from the withdrawal meditations.
The Great Commentary, on verse 125 of the Gnosis chapter, says:
In order, the fleshly eyes, celestial eyes, buddha eyes, wisdom eyes, and eyes of gnosis will arise from meditation.156
Therefore the passage beginning with the phrase “Into pure cloudless space”157 teaches the place for day yoga meditation and explains the space of the cloudless space–like appearance  from which the day signs arise. Both the tantra and its commentary agree on this.
Furthermore, even if the passage beginning “Into pure cloudless space” were applied to the eye positioning in the day yoga, as some lamas have asserted, the line “eyes not closed, looking upward” would still teach the common eye position for both night and day yogas.
The way of looking upward in the night yoga would be as explained previously, whereas in the day yoga, both eyes would be wide open and look into external cloud-free space. This procedure would still not prevent the winds from entering the central channel, because during the night-yoga meditations, with the positioning of the eyes and the placement of mind as explained previously, the winds would enter the central channel, and the night signs would appear.
With the night yoga completed, the day yoga would begin, and at that time the winds in the central channel would have become well established. Because of this the mental placement is the same as the night yoga — the eyes are wide open and look into external cloud-free space.
After the night signs have quickly arisen, the day signs of the blazing firelike appearance and so forth arise in the cloudless space–like appearance that occurs at the end of the night signs. Concerning the positioning of the eyes, the winds that operate through the entrances of the sense organ become stiff, the eyes do not blink, the eyeballs do not move but stare wide open into external space. This method also will accomplish the practice.
To explain withdrawal according to the thinking of Jé Tsongkhapa, an explanation of this passage from the tantra and commentary is very important, and yet other commentators have said nothing on this topic.
Now I may be of little intelligence and weak in practice, but I would request the intelligent to examine well my rough explanation. The development of the signs Verse 115 of the Gnosis chapter says: Blazing, moon, sun, vajras, the supreme part and the drop are seen.
In the center the form of the Buddha, the nonobject, manifold saṃbhogakāya;
in cloudless space the yogi looks with wide-open eyes,
until a black line emitting rays of pure light is seen in the channel of time.158 The commentary on this says:
Then the yogi looks into cloudless space, and from that space comes the yoga of daytime, “self-created, created from space.” “The great fire of wisdom knowledge” is the blazing within the cloudless space.
Likewise “the great light illuminating, the brilliance of gnosis” is the moonlike appearance.
“A lamp for beings” is the sun.
“The lamp of wisdom” is the vajra or Rāhu.
“The great radiance and clear light” is lightning, or the supreme part.
“Greatest of knowledge, mighty secret” is the drop.
These are the ten signs. The Buddha taught the night signs in the Guhyasamāja and others and the day signs in the Saṃgīti.
“The king of secret mantra, accomplisher of great purpose” refers to seeing the fully aspected forms of the vase, friezes, and so forth.
“In the center” means in the center of the drop, where is seen “the form of the Buddha.” Because it is nonsubstantial and unimputed, it is “the nonobject manifold saṃbhogakāya.”159
Look each day until, in the center of the drop, “a black line” the width of  a hair “emitting rays of stainless light is seen in the channel of time,” or avadhūtī.160
The above commentary describes the six signs and other signs arising after the completion of the ten signs. Similarly the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says:
Here “the great fire of wisdom knowledge” is the appearance of “blazing.” “The great light illuminating” is the moonlike appearance, which is also “the brilliance of gnosis.” “A lamp for beings” is the sunlike appearance.
“The lamp of wisdom” is the Rāhu-like appearance.
“Great radiance and clear light” is the lightninglike appearance.
“Greatest of knowledge, mighty secret” is the droplike appearance.
It is blue in color and shaped like the moon.
“The king of secret mantra, accomplisher of great purpose” means that with the eyes created by withdrawal, the yogi sees all appearance within the three realms as being like illusions, like dreams, and like forms within a prognostic mirror.161
These two commentaries clearly decode the “other language” used by the Saṃgīti to describe the six signs and the signs that arise after them. Therefore, after the completion of the night yoga, in a place for day-yoga meditation, as previously described, the posture and mental placement are the same as was described for the night yoga.
Either of the two eye positions can be practiced. From the meditation the signs, from smoke to the cloud-free spacelike appearance, arise quickly. After that, in the very space of that spacelike appearance, the blazing firelike appearance occurs first, followed by the moonlike and the sunlike appearances.
Then comes the Rāhu-like appearance, like many sparks glittering in the dark. After that comes the “supreme” or lightning-flash appearance, followed by an appearance similar to a blue drop in the circular shape of a moon disk. After that various forms, such as those resembling a vase and so on, are seen.
At the same time, in the center of the blue circular drop, a black line appears. It is the width of a hair and emits rays of stainless light. Within that line is the saṃbhogakāya in the form of Vajrasattva and consort in embrace as well as the three worlds in various forms, all of which are the nature of that saṃbhogakāya. The drop and the black line are seen in the ”channel of time,” meaning the avadhūtī central channel. Filled with Good Qualities also states:
“Uṣṇīṣa form” is the form of the Buddha.
“The three realms” means that in the center of the great drop is a black line in which various forms of the three worlds individually appear, all of which are of the nature of the saṃbhogakāya.162 This passage appears to be the explanation of the above quote, “In the center of the drop, ‘a black line’ the width of a hair ‘emitting rays of stainless light is seen in the channel of time,’ or avadhūtī.”
What sees these phenomena?
Nāropa, in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations, says:
The fleshly eye consciousnesses and so forth of the fleshly sense organs engage in the inner forms and focus on the inner emptiness. Like forms seen by a clairvoyant maiden looking into her mirror, all imputed phenomena are seen within an unimputed emptiness. This is spoken of as the branch of withdrawal.163 This passage states that by meditating on the objects of withdrawal yoga, the organ of the fleshly sight is developed.
This is an organ other than the normal sight organ.
The fleshly eye consciousness that arises from that organ of sight is what “sees” in withdrawal.
The kinds of objects that the fleshly eye consciousness can generally apprehend are spoken of in Filled with Good Qualities:
The fleshly eye sees phenomena up to one hundred yojana.164
So how does it differ from the celestial eye?
The same text says:
The celestial eye sees the subtle and individual forms of limitless world realms.165 There is this difference, and although the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary talks of “celestial organs of the eyes,” it should be understood as referring to fleshly eyes. The nature of these empty forms is that they are images or reflections of the primordial clear-light mind, which itself appears as an object in the form of a cloudless space–like vacuity. These empty forms lack the substantiality of subtle particles, are not imputed by the mind, but are self-arising forms of smoke and so forth.
The tantra and commentary say, “From the emptiness, smoke and mirage.”166 The “emptiness” in this phrase refers to a vacuity that is an aspect of the clear-light mind, and the phrase itself means that from this vacuity arises its empty form images.
The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary, which shares the thinking of the tantra and commentary, says:
Inwardly, focusing on the emptiness, all unimputed phenomena are seen. These are like forms seen in a mirror by a prognostic maiden, reflections of the three-world  forms of the Buddha. This is spoken of as the branch of withdrawal.167 This passage speaks of focusing inwardly on the clear-light mind vacuity from which the empty forms are seen. Also Short Assertions on Our Views states:
Beyond existence and nonexistence, this uncontaminated mind,
a profundity without apprehension;
meditate for the signs of reliability.
First comes the mirage.168
This means that the clear-light mind lacks manifest contamination and is beyond the duality of holding objects as existing or not existing. This profundity is without apprehension, and within this nonapprehended state, smoke and the other signs of reliability will arise. The yogi, therefore, should meditate on this nonapprehended state.
Likewise Nāropa, in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations, clearly says:
The mind of emptiness, devoid of perceiver and perceived, is a wisdom consciousness. Its images appear directly to the yogi.169
The first summary from the Realms chapter also says:
Similarly the clear-light mind is not seen by the methods of conceptual meditation.
In its actuality, with left channel
and right channel as one, it will be seen.170 This explains that the clear-light mind will not be seen by the methods of the conceptual meditations of the generation stage.
How is it seen?
It is seen in its actuality when the winds that flow within the left and right channels combine as one in the central channel.
That is the meaning of this passage and others from the commentary that explain how the clear-light mind is seen as a result of the winds entering the central channel.
It is the meaning also of many commentary passages previously quoted that talk of empty forms being seen as a result of the winds entering the central channel. The way smoke and the other empty forms arise as images of the clear-light mind is as follows. During the yoga of withdrawal the meditations upon the methods for bringing the winds into the central channel, as described previously, cause the winds to enter the central channel for the first time. A little of the clear-light mind is experienced, from which arises the smokelike clear-light mind image.
Then as the amount of wind entering the central channel gradually increases, so the clear-light mind becomes clearer, and the mirage, firefly, and lamplike signs arise as images of that mind until, finally, just a cloud-free spacelike vacuity appears.
With the signs of the night yoga completed, the day yoga meditations begin. The signs from smoke up to the spacelike vacuity again arise quickly, and by looking at and meditating single-pointedly within this spacelike vacuity, the day signs arise. The preceding explanation is the definitive meaning of the following two passages from the Great Commentary: Here the winds enter the central channel, and from the total emptiness the signs of smoke and so forth are seen.171
Then the yogi looks into the cloudless space, and from that space, the “self-created, created from space” of the yoga of daytime.172
That the meaning of “Then the yogi looks into the cloudless space” and so on is as it has just been explained is clearly supported by the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary as previously quoted.
Lamas of the past have explained the “space” as external or actual space and the “emptiness” of “From the emptiness, smoke and mirage” as referring to nonaspected emptiness or as a totally nonapprehended source.
This position also needs deliberation.
When this natural clear-light mind is manifest, empty forms such as smoke appear as images of this mind, like forms appearing in a prognostic mirror.
When the death clear-light mind is manifest at the time of death, the empty forms are as described in the Inner chapter. When the primordial clear-light mind is made manifest on the path by the ten winds entering the central channel, images of this clear-light mind are formed, like the sun and its rays. These appear as various empty forms, like forms in a clairvoyant’s mirror.
These empty forms become clearer until finally their characteristics are that they become limitless and obscuration-free phenomena of the three worlds. This is the wheel  of Kālacakra and is the wisdom of method and wisdom. The clear-light mind itself, in dependence on other factors, become the cause for the supreme and unchanging consciousness freed from all obscuration.
This is time  and is the method of method and wisdom.
Such phenomena and consciousness, or wisdom and method, become the inseparable and unified wheel of time.
The Great Commentary, in the Supreme and Unchanging Consciousness summary in the fifth chapter, states:
The conqueror Kālacakra is of the nature of method and wisdom. This is taught as a relationship between consciousness and phenomena. Here the supreme and unchanging consciousness is the cause that puts an end to all obstruction. This is said to be “time” and method.
The limitless phenomena of the three worlds are the “wheel” and the wisdom.
That consciousness and those phenomena as one, is the wheel of time.173 By focusing on these empty forms of smoke and so forth that are unified with the clear-light mind and meditating single-pointedly, they become the limitless and obscuration-free phenomena of the three worlds.
The clear-light mind itself, developed into unchanging bliss and placed in single-pointed meditative equipoise upon emptiness, will create the dharmakāya indivisibility of emptiness and unchanging great bliss, which is in an inseparable union with the limitless and obscuration-free phenomena.
The empty forms of smoke and so forth, especially the enjoyment body in the form of Vajrasattva and consort in embrace that appears in the center of the black hairwidth line, are similar-type causes and bases for the accomplishment of the resultant empty-form Kālacakra in mother-and-father embrace.
The empty forms of smoke and so forth, especially those of the three realms such as the vase that appear like the forms in a clairvoyant’s mirror after the ten signs have appeared, are bases for the accomplishment of the various obscuration-free empty forms. Therefore these have to be the primary objects of single-pointed meditation. During the yogas of withdrawal, meditative absorption, and so forth, the features of the individual empty forms clearly appear to the mind, but beyond that these forms cannot perform their individual functions.
However every empty form at its resultant stage is capable of performing its own function of form, fire, and so forth. This is a great difference.
The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says:
Therefore the Buddha has said that the initial signs of smoke and so forth are signs at the time of meditation.
All those who say “at the time of accomplishment” are finding fault with the assertions of the Buddha.
They are dismissing teachings of the Buddha, such as, “All thoughts abandoned, meditate for a day.” At the time of accomplishment, the illusionlike and dreamlike worldly smoke and so forth are no longer signs. Here is actual smoke and fire, capable of performing the function of burning.
It is the same with the rain of saffron, flowers, jewels, and gold.
Therefore the signs of smoke and so forth appear within the six-branched yoga.174 The word “here” from the phrase “Here is actual smoke” means “here at the time of accomplishment,” and the passage therefore makes the point clearly.
This passage also refutes the assertion that the signs of smoke and so forth are ultimate truths and that to see them is to see the dharmakāya.
This is so because this passage teaches that the empty forms of withdrawal yoga transform into perfected resultant empty forms, and that which is an ultimate truth cannot be perfected.
Moreover it is contradictory to assert that the dharmakāya can perform functions of burning and so forth.
Furthermore the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says:
Here “self-blessing” refers to withdrawal, wherein conventional emptiness is seen. “Signs” refers to the appearances that are like clouds, smoke, and so forth. Those ending with the lamp are seen first.175 This passage states that the signs of smoke and so forth are conventional truths.
Nāropa in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations says the same.176 It should be understood  that these passages refute empty forms as ultimate truths.177 Common meditative concentrations by themselves that do not focus on bringing winds into the dhūtī can bring about the appearance of moonlike, sunlike, and vajralike signs.
This is stated in the Laṅkāvatārasūtra.178 Meditations that do focus on bringing the winds into the dhūtī can also bring about the signs of smoke and so forth before the winds enter the dhūtī. Therefore it is important not to confuse these two with the definitive signs of withdrawal.
If the former is confused with definitive withdrawal signs, the practitioner will go astray by holding non-Buddhist meditative concentrations and some common meditative concentrations as being completion-stage paths.
If the latter is confused with definitive withdrawal signs, the practitioner will wrongly assume the accomplishment of withdrawal before the winds have entered the dhūtī.
You will look to see if you possess the benefits that accrue from attaining withdrawal as taught in the tantra and commentary, and realizing you do not, you will create the karma and obstruction of thinking that what has been taught in the tantras is not true.
So how can we differentiate between the signs of smoke and so forth that appear before the winds enter the central channel and those that appear afterward?
The Later Guhyasamāja Tantra says, “From the stable vajra path,”179 and its commentary Bright Lamp says:
“From the stable vajra path” means the progression of the five signs, not transgressed.180 Therefore, when the signs of smoke and so forth appear in the proper order and are focused on and meditated upon in this order, it is an indication that the winds have entered the dhūtī. Ritual of enhancement at times of nonaccomplishment
Verse 119 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter says:
If by withdrawal and so forth the wishes of the mantra practitioner are not met…181 This and following lines in the tantra and commentary teach the enhancement rituals of the withdrawal and prāṇāyāma yogas. Prāṇāyāma is included in the phrase “and so forth”  and will be discussed in its own section.
Concerning the enhancement necessary here for the withdrawal yoga, Opening the Eye to What Is Hidden says:
The forceful practice of the yogis should be known. When the yogas of withdrawal and so forth bring about the appearance of various form bodies in the body of emptiness, and yet the yogi has not bound the winds and therefore not developed an instance of the bliss of nonemission, at that time the yogi should practice the wrathful method and the nada meditation, which will be explained later. The yogi straightens the body, sits in vajra position, with breath natural and mind undistracted. With the right hand gradually press the veins of the neck or the two sleep-countering veins, and remain unmoving.
Do this gently again and again, many times, for as long as the upper body and the head remain without pain. If this is done, the winds will flow into the central channel, and the four drops of bodhicitta that have entered the vajra jewel placed inside the lotus of wisdom are prevented from leaving, thereby creating bliss. This bliss, not approaching a hundredth part of that nonfalling, similar-to-cause bliss, has nevertheless accomplished the significance of the body comprising instances of innate bliss. Therefore it will be seen in this life.
This is the first wrathful method.182
As this passage explains, some people may meditate on the objects of withdrawal, causing the signs of smoke and so forth to arise, but the winds will not have entered the central channel. If that happens, the ritual for enhancement is as follows. How it is actually performed is described in the lines from “The yogi straightens the body” until “and the head remain without pain.” Straightening the body and so forth means to adopt the body and eye positions of withdrawal. The thumb and ring finger of the right hand gradually press the right and left neck veins or the right and left sleep-countering veins. The mind remains single-pointedly placed and unmoving in its focus.
This is to be practiced quite gently again and again.
How many times?
For as long as the upper body and the head are without pain.
If this is done, the winds will flow in the central channel.
The winds flowing in the central channel will prevent the bodhicitta  drops falling from the opening of the jewel.
When in union with a mudrā consort, the four drops of bodhicitta that create the four periods of waking, dream, sleep, and sexual bliss, and which have entered the yogi’s vajra jewel placed inside the lotus of the wisdom consort, are stopped and do not emerge from the opening of the jewel. This creates the ascending innate bliss. “This bliss, not approaching,” or not standing comparison with, “a hundredth part of that nonfalling,” or unchanging, “similar-to-cause bliss, has nevertheless accomplished,” or created, “the significance,” or cause, of the body comprising instances of innate bliss. Therefore this body of great innate bliss will be seen and accomplished in this life.
The lines from “If this is done, the winds will flow into the central channel” onward teach the function and benefits of this enhancement ritual.
At the completion of withdrawal yoga, one can choose to use a mudrā consort or not.
If a consort is used, the ability to prevent the bodhicitta from leaving the jewel will have been achieved. If this ritual is performed and the winds have still not entered the central channel, Opening the Eye to What Is Hidden describes a method for inducing bliss: Now the second forceful method will be described.
When in meditative union with wisdom, who is the nature of emptiness, and there arises a hot sensation on the body or the sensation of tingling at the opening of the downwardly expelling wind channel in the secret place of the method, who is the nature of compassion, press the base of the vajra jewel with the right hand.
With the body unmoving concentrate the mind in bliss and draw it up. Push the flesh of the lower stomach against the joint.183 Stare with eyes wide open. Bend the toes in and stretch out the heel. With both wisdom and method unmoving and mind placed on bliss, this is the second forceful practice.184
The phrase “wisdom, who is the nature of emptiness” refers to the consort.
“Method, who is the nature of compassion” refers to the yogi. The rest is not difficult to understand.
This practice must be learned from a lama.
The above explanation from Opening the Eye to What Is Hidden has been reproduced here because it is necessary for practice, but in the thinking of the tantra it is to be explained in the section on prāṇāyāma.
In the writings of the dharma master Butön it states:
In the Kālacakrapāda Transmission it is said:
“The enhancement of withdrawal
forcefully completes binding and activities.”185 When the body and eyes are not in their positions, attempt to position them in the daylight, and check if this has been been accomplished. If not, then as before, enter into meditation according to this excellent instruction.186
Therefore both the dharma master Butön and the Kālacakrapāda Transmission maintain that this particular enhancement practice is for correcting the posture and eye position.
This is not correct because this enhancement ritual is to be performed when, having implemented the posture and eye position as described previously, the meditation does not bring the winds into the central channel. Therefore the words of Jé Tsongkhapa, “instruction on the initial meditation is not suitable to be an enhancement ritual”187 are very true.
Some practitioners of the past have advised, “Stare blankly into a copper vessel full of water.
Look at that blankness and into space, and empty forms will arise.” This and many other rituals described as being the enhancement ritual of this section seem mostly to be rituals for producing the appearance of empty forms, whereas the teachings on the enhancement ritual taught in the tantra and commentary at this juncture are for occasions during withdrawal yoga when the empty forms have appeared but the winds have not entered the central channel.
Even dying with the remainder of the meditations unfinished, the power of the yoga ensures continuation Verse 97 of the Inner chapter states:
With the mighty yogas unachieved, should the migration of the mind bring death,
the yogi will be born into a great and powerful family in a glorious human world possessed of the yoga.
By past familiarity, once again the yogi will hold the pure and vast gnosis yoga. The yogi, achieving gnosis,
travels to a place supreme and eternal, never to take birth anywhere again.188 If a practitioner practicing a yoga such as withdrawal dies before attaining the higher yogas, in his next life he will be born in buddha and bodhisattva families endowed with the foundation for the practice of mantra. On that foundation he will meditate on the remainder of the path and attain the highest state of the unity of unchanging great bliss and the empty form endowed with every supreme aspect. Valid cognition
The fleshly eye sensory consciousness arises in dependence upon the fleshly eye sense organ. It sees clearly the empty forms of smoke and so forth, it is undeceiving, and therefore it is a sensory and direct valid cognition. This is in keeping with the Vajragarbha Commentary, which describes withdrawal as a sensory and direct valid cognition.189 Likewise Opening the Eye to What Is Hidden says:
Here, concerning the objects that appear to the mind, the tathāgata fleshly eye sees for a thousand yojana.
Similarly the pure celestial eye sees for two thousand yojana.
The pure eye of the Buddha sees the minds and consciousnesses of others.
The Buddha taught the five sights in the Dharmasaṃgītisūtra.
They are, in order, the fleshly eye, celestial eye, eye of the Buddha, eye of wisdom, and eye of gnosis, and they will arise by the power of the yogi placing the mind in the avadhūtī and meditating.
Then there is nothing that the omniscient mind does not see or does not understand.190
The first sentence of this passage describes how empty forms of withdrawal are seen by the fleshly eye consciousness.
The next three sentences from “Similarly” up to “Dharmasaṃgītisūtra” describe how empty forms are seen by the remaining four sights on the progressively higher paths, as well as indicating the sutra source for the five sights. The next sentence, beginning “They are, in order” teaches that the five sights arise from the winds and the mind being brought inside the central channel.
The last sentence teaches  that there is nothing the perfection of the five sights or enlightened gnosis does not see or understand. This passage from Opening the Eye to What Is Hidden is similar to the passage in the Great Commentary on verse 119 of the Gnosis chapter, which says:
With tathāgata fleshly eyes one first sees the appearances within one’s own mind. With the celestial and other eyes, the minds and consciousnesses of others are seen.
In the Dharmasaṃgītisūtra the Conqueror taught the five sights.
They are, in order, fleshly eyes, celestial eyes, Buddha eyes, wisdom eyes, and eyes of gnosis. These will arise from meditation.191
The descriptions of these sights in Nāropa’s Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations and the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary can be seen in previous quotations from these texts.
Purification divisions
The gnosis aggregate, gnosis element, and so forth of the gnosis-aggregate group are the six phenomena to be purified in withdrawal yoga. Withdrawal is the purifier and is of the Vajrasattva family.
The divisions are the ten signs of smoke and so forth.
Verse 115 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter says:
Withdrawal is Vajrasattva and the ten forms. On this the Great Commentary says: The first practice is withdrawal.
This is Vajrasattva, the gnosis aggregate.
Because that is divided into ten signs, there are “ten forms” that appear.
They are smoke, mirage, fireflies, lamp, blazing, moon, sun, Rāhu, part, and drop. These form the unimputed gnosis aggregate.
What are the six phenomena of the gnosis aggregate group?
They are gnosis aggregate, gnosis element, mind, sound, the supreme organ, and the emission of urine.
These six are the bases of purification for the paths of the Vajrasattva family.
When purified these six become free of obscuration, are of a single taste, and are fused together as one.
Vajrasattva pervades all families, and so it should be understood that withdrawal yoga pervades all lower paths.
There are immediate and final results. On the immediate results, verse 118 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter says:
In withdrawal the yogi apprehends no objects and is blessed by every mantra.192 On this the Great Commentary says:
By the power of withdrawal, when the forms are stable and the yogi has attained purification, he is blessed by every mantra and is able to perform giving by words and so forth.193
The Guhyasamāja says:
The meditator by withdrawal
is blessed by every mantra.194 When the yogi has completed withdrawal yoga, he is blessed by every mantra and develops the power of “giving by words.” For example, by saying “Let there be no poison,” the poison disappears.
The final result of withdrawal is the complete nonobscuration of the six phenomena of the gnosis aggregate in the form of Vajrasattva, Jñānapāramitā, and so forth. The Yoga of Meditative Absorption The second yoga, the stabilizing meditative absorption This has six outlines: 1.The meaning of the term meditative absorption 2.The time for meditation
3.The way to meditate 4.Valid cognition 5.Purification divisions
6.Results The meaning of the term meditative absorption This branch is called meditative absorption195 because it holds single-pointedly to empty forms.
The Great Commentary, on verse 115 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says of its meaning:
In meditative absorption the five object types and five consciousnesses are as one  in various forms.196
In the writings of the dharma master Butön it says: Because of the mind undistracted and single-pointedly held on empty forms, it is known as meditative absorption.197
The dharma master Chogpa198 says the same.
Others who assert the position of the dharma master Khedrup Jé say of the etymology of meditative absorption: Because it single-pointedly stabilizes the mind upon the empty forms, it is known as meditative absorption.
This is refuted by Jé Tsongkhapa in his Notes on Kālacakra:
The assertion by some that “because it stabilizes withdrawal it is known as meditative absorption” does not correspond to the etymology.199
This means that the term stabilize  in the lines “it single-pointedly stabilizes the mind upon the empty forms” and in the phrase “stabilizes withdrawal,”and the term absorption  in “meditative absorption” are of similar pronunciation but of different spellings.200 Therefore the statement that it “does not correspond to the etymology” is very true.
The time for meditation The Kālacakrapāda Transmission says, “The time is the time of the flow of space,”201 thereby asserting that meditation should begin after the space winds begin to flow.
Although this appears to be based on the fact that meditative absorption yoga is the branch of Akṣobhya, it is not clearly stated in the tantra and commentary.
Therefore our own position is that the meditation begins after the appearance of the tenth sign and the various empty forms that subsequently appear. The tenth sign is the saṃbhogakāya form seen in the black line inside the drop.
A Short Teaching on Initiations says: Like dreams, forms are seen.
Meditate constantly on these forms.202 Nāropa, in his commentary to this text, says:
“Forms” are various forms. “Meditate” means to stabilize with the branch of meditative absorption.203
The same commentary says:
The time for approximation is that firstly one meditates with withdrawal, and then one stabilizes with the branch of meditative absorption.204 Therefore the ten signs and the subsequent various empty forms are achieved by withdrawal, and stabilization is accomplished by meditative absorption. The way to meditate This is under five headings:
1.Purpose of the meditation
2.Actual way to meditate
3.Subdivisions
4.Measure of completion
5.Signs of accomplishment
Purpose of the meditation The purpose of the meditation is to stabilize the empty forms achieved during withdrawal.
This can be understood from the above quote from Nāropa’s commentary beginning “The time for approximation.” Actual way to meditate
This has two outlines:
1.Refuting the position of others
2.Our own position Refuting the position of others Some, thinking it to be the position of Jé Tsongkhapa, say: Empty forms appearing during meditative-absorption yoga are all conceived by one’s own effort. They are transformed into the forms of deities one has the greater meditative familiarity with and that appear easily to the mind.
These are meditated on repeatedly, and upon the culmination of that meditation, one transforms them into forms of Kālacakra. After this practice they all transform into light and absorb into one another to become the form of Kālacakra in the form of Vajrasattva and consort.
Previously this form appeared at a distance from oneself, but from here onward one’s mind enters this form and becomes indivisible with it. Pride is generated and meditation is performed again and again. Finally the deity no longer appears at a distance from oneself, and one is able to transfer a natural uncontrived pride to the deity.
Such a meditation creates a special basis for the development of deity form in the branch of recollection.205 This passage is from an instruction manual. It may sound very profound, but I cannot see it as being correct, because the empty forms in this and other sections are not imputed or conceived by the mind at all but must arise on their own accord.
The fifth summary from the Realms chapter says:
That which is taught as ultimate truth is beyond the world, and is for the attainment of the mahāmudrā siddhi endowed with every supreme feature. It grants the desired result, manifestly appearing in the space of the yogi’s clear-light mind, like images in a mirror seen by a maiden, devoid of phenomena imputed by the mind. It produces the gnosis of unchanging bliss.206 Because the form of the Buddha is without substance and because it is unimputed.207
Similar passages are found throughout the tantra and commentary, and yet you say that the empty forms that appear during meditative absorption are deliberately conceived by the mind and changed into the forms of deities?
It would follow, too, that the ten signs that appear during withdrawal would also have to be transformed by the mind into forms of deities.
According to the above assertion it seems that if it were not possible to transform the various manifest empty forms into deities and especially into a single Kālacakra mother and father, then the appearance of these empty forms would have no purpose. However Kālacakra in the form of Vajrasattva mother and father adorned with the features and signs in the black line is stabilized by meditative absorption and is the basis of the empty-form Kālacakra of the branch of recollection. Likewise the various aspected empty forms, such as the vase and so forth, that appear after the ten signs are also stabilized by meditative absorption and are the perfect basis for the unobscured empty forms of enlightenment. There is no need to transform them into the forms of deities.
Verse 122 of the Gnosis chapter says:
The emptiness becomes the forms of the ten signs. The signs are fully aspected and become the unending, supreme indestructible bliss.208 On this the commentary says:
Likewise the emptiness becomes the definite forms of the ten signs of smoke and so forth, and the signs are fully aspected form.
From the forms comes the unchanging bliss.209 Therefore the emptiness, which is the clear-light mind in its aspect of vacuity, becomes the ten signs of smoke and so forth, and the signs of the various empty forms such as the vases and friezes are fully aspected forms.
The passage says that the unchanging bliss comes from these fully aspected forms.
It does not say that they are transformed into the forms of deities.
On these empty forms of the vases, friezes, and so forth being fully aspected forms, the Great Commentary says:
The fully aspected forms of the vases, friezes, and so forth are seen.210 Furthermore the previous assertion is not that of Jé Tsongkhapa.
His Notes on Kālacakra says: Withdrawal is meditation for the creation of form not yet created.
Meditative absorption is meditation for the stabilization of form already created.
What is the object to be stabilized after the meditation? The continuity of the object of meditation itself is to be stabilized.211 Therefore the empty forms are single-pointedly concentrated upon as they appear in the meditations of withdrawal.
Some apply this particular way of meditating to each branch. This is not correct, because this branch is at a level of insight that only comes from the mental placement of meditative absorption, which will now be explained.
Our own position The meditation is performed in the place of day or night withdrawal yoga with eye and body positions and mental placements held as in withdrawal. When the empty forms arise, it is these forms that are single-pointedly concentrated upon.
A Short Teaching on Initiations says that meditative absorption focuses constantly upon the empty forms themselves:
Like dreams, forms are seen.
Meditate constantly on these forms.212 The Kālacakrapāda Transmission also says:
The objects of mind are empty forms.
On empty forms of previous meditation,
mind is placed looking into space.
Mind placed in emptiness is wisdom.213 This is also Jé Tsongkhapa’s position, as can be understood from the above quote from Notes on Kālacakra. Subdivisions Verse 116 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter states: Meditative absorption also is wisdom, conception,
discernment, joy, and unmoving bliss of a single-pointed mind.214
On this the Great Commentary says:
Similarly, within this form, there is “wisdom,” which means the view, “conception,“ meaning apprehending phenomena, “discernment,” meaning ascertainment, “joy,” meaning attraction to form, and “unmoving bliss,” meaning the mind and form together as one.215
Nāropa explains these by commenting on them as they appear in the Later Guhyasamāja, which says:
Meditative absorption is in five forms:
conception, discernment, joy,
bliss, and single-pointed mind. This is meditative absorption in brief.216 These are the five divisions in brief. The tantra continues with their explanation:
Three secrets arising is conception;
its application is discernment;
vivid joy the third;
gathered bliss the fourth;
self-mind, the cessation of arising consciousness
and objects of consciousness, is the fifth;
it is of the nature of all buddhas, it is pacification,
all desire abides this way.217 The meaning of these verses Nāropa has explained in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations:
Concerning “three secrets” and so forth, the three times and three realms, whose nature is the enlightened body, speech, and mind, are the three secrets.
The one-time mind, holding just their rough forms vividly illuminated as the three realms, is the “arising.” Experiencing and understanding this is the “three secrets arising.” That is “conception.” “Its application is discernment” means discernment applied to the objects of conception.
The apprehending of phenomena possessed of animate and inanimate characteristics, such as the vase and the friezes and so forth, is “discernment.” “Vivid joy” means joy that is the blissful state keeping the mind on all objects held by discernment.
“Gathered bliss” means that the experience of the blissful state coming from the mind dwelling in all phenomena becomes a cause of great pliancy within the body.
Concerning “self-mind, the cessation of arising consciousness,” etc., “consciousness” refers to the six consciousnesses of sight and so forth that engage the “objects of consciousness,” which in turn refers to the finality of the six spheres of phenomena. “Arising” means the arising of these consciousnesses and objects of consciousnesses.
Their “cessation” is the single-pointed mind  in which the apprehending and the apprehended are possessed of the characteristics of emptiness.
This is “self-mind.” Self-mind in such a form is in the nature of all buddhas. Because concepts of form and so forth have been pacified, there is “pacification” appearing vividly as the three realms. This is the sole and ultimate emptiness.
Concerning “all desire abides,” “all desire” means all phenomena, and these phenomena abide in a form vivid and indivisible from one’s mind.218
This passage should be explained a little.
“Three secrets arising” is the meaning of conception.
What are the three secrets and what does “arising” mean?
Empty forms appearing in the aspects of the three times and the three realms and whose natures are the enlightened body, speech, and mind are the three secrets.
“Arising” refers to the “one-time” mind holding the rough or coarse aspects of the vivid empty forms appearing as the three realms.
In short, experiencing and perceiving in a rough but vivid form, the empty forms, whose nature is the enlightened body, speech, and mind, and which appear in the forms of the animate and inanimate phenomena of the three times and three realms, is what is meant by “three secrets arising.” That is the first branch, called conception.
Application to the objects of conception is the division of discernment.
How is this application carried out?
The objects of conception are the empty forms of animate and inanimate phenomena, and the details of these empty-form phenomena, such as those of the vases, friezes, and so forth, are discerned and clearly appear. This is discernment.
Although mental pliancy is the actual cause of the mind being naturally settled on the detailed empty forms that make up the objects of discernment, joy is a blissful or joyful mind that induces such a state.
Bliss is the bliss of the physical pliancy that arises from the mind being single-pointedly held on the discerned empty forms. The “single-pointed mind” spoken of in the Later Guhyasamāja is the same as the “wisdom” taught in the tantra and commentary and is explained by lines beginning “self-mind, the cessation of arising consciousness.”  Consciousness here refers to the six consciousnesses from sight to mental consciousness. “Objects of consciousness” refers to the six objects from visual form to mental phenomena. “Arising” refers to the six consciousnesses engaging with the six objects.
“Cessation” refers to severing the connection of the apprehending subject and the apprehended object, which lies between the mind with its six consciousnesses and the six objects themselves.
The main characteristic of the “emptiness” that is the severing of this connection is the “single-pointed mind,” spoken of as “self-mind.” Although connections between the five sensory consciousnesses and their objects are severed from withdrawal yoga onward, the same is not true of the connection between mental consciousness and its objects. Therefore, up to the division of bliss in meditative absorption, the empty forms and the mental consciousness that abides single-pointedly within them exist in separate aspects as apprehended and apprehender.
However the empty-form objects and clear-light–mind subject do not exist in separate aspects as apprehended and apprehender. Subject and object are as one. This “self-mind” is a single-pointed mind, indivisible from all buddhas in the aspect of empty forms. In particular it is indivisible from the empty-form Kālacakra in the aspect of mother-father embrace. In this way “concepts of apprehended form,” or objects, “and so forth,” referring to the apprehending consciousness, “have been pacified.” “Therefore this pacification” is the “sole and ultimate” mind, indivisible from the “emptiness” form “appearing vividly as the three realms,” and especially indivisible from the empty form that is Kālacakra in mother-and-father union.
Measure of completion During withdrawal, meditation is directed upon the sites of penetrative focusing within the body. When empty forms arise, these are meditated upon with constant single-pointed equipoise. In the branches of conception and discernment, rough empty forms followed by detailed empty forms are seen. The continuity of these empty forms is single-pointedly focused upon and, at the end of a continuous session of meditative concentration, joy and bliss, induce the twin benefits of mental and physical pliancy.
The empty-form apparition of Kālacakra mother and father, as a mere appearance within one’s mind,  is indivisibly mixed with one’s own mind. That enlightened form no longer appears as mind, and one is able to move self-pride effortlessly to that enlightened form. At that time meditative absorption has been accomplished. From then onward one moves into prāṇāyāma yoga. To summarize:
In the branch of meditative absorption, the body and eye positioning and the mental placement are the same as in withdrawal. Meditation brings about a special entry of the winds into the dhūtī, from which the winds of the indicative conceptual states of mind are stopped from flowing through the right and left channels, and the conceptions themselves are halted. The nonconceptual mind of clear light arises together with empty forms, which are vividly seen by the meditator with a fleshly eye consciousness. These forms, and especially the empty-form Kālacakra mother and father that appears within the black line inside the dhūtī at the midway point between the eyebrows, are single-pointedly focused on by the clear-light mind. From the ensuing meditation the empty-form objects and clear-light–mind subject merge indivisibly until all appearance of a separate apprehender and apprehended is lost, and the yogi is able to transfer self-pride to the form of Kālacakra mother and father.
The empty form in its appearance as Kālacakra mother and father, to which self-pride has been transferred, is the basis and similar-type cause for the actual realization of the saṃbhogakāya Kālacakra mother and father during the branch of recollection and the resultant state. Signs of accomplishment The previously described signs become more and more distinct until they are of a brilliant clarity. Moreover appearances of limitless buddha fields and limitless beings of the six realms arise.
Empty-form images of pleasant and unpleasant sounds, smells never before experienced, pleasant and unpleasant tastes, and sensations, such as heat and cold, all appear.
At first they appear externally, and then they appear inside the black line. When they are purified, clairvoyance will arise. This description is according to the dharma master Butön.219 Valid cognition
Because the empty forms are clearly seen by clairvoyant eyes and such seeing is nondeceptive, the cognition is a sensory and direct valid cognition. Purification divisions The Great Commentary says:
“Meditative absorption is Akṣobhya” refers to the consciousness aggregate. Its ten forms are the five object types and five consciousnesses. These are as one in various forms in meditative absorption.220
The consciousness-aggregate group of six is to be purified until it becomes nonobscured.
Meditative absorption is divided into the five branches of conception and so forth, each of which is divided into consciousness subject and object to make ten. These are of two types: immediate and final.
Immediate results
Verse 118 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter says:
Lord of men, five kinds of clairvoyance are achieved, purified by the yoga of meditative absorption.221 On this the Great Commentary says:
When the eyes are not closed, they become celestial eyes.
Similarly the celestial ear and so forth are purified by meditative absorption.222 Likewise the Later Guhyasamāja says:
By the meditative equipoise of meditative-absorption gnosis,
five types of clairvoyance are achieved.223 The immediate result of completing the meditative absorption branch is the attainment of the five kinds of clairvoyance as well as countless other benefits, such as being able to listen to the buddhas and to work extensively for living beings.
Final results
The consciousness aggregate, the element of space, the organ of hearing, the element of mental phenomena, the secret organ, and the control of seminal fluid, are all purified to become six unobscured phenomena, beginning with Buddha Akṣobhya.
The omniscient Butön posits an enhancement ritual for the yoga of meditative absorption. In his writings it says:
“Meditate forcefully on the empty forms of meditative absorption” means in order to make firm the activities, bindings, and body positions, centralize the mind by way of the previous instructions.224
As in withdrawal yoga the practice of correcting the body positions and so forth  cannot be an enhancement ritual.
Also in his writings he quotes verse 195 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, the first of the last forty verses left by the Great Commentary as “easy to understand” verses, which says:
Turn from the sun, stand in its rays, and stare at your shadow,
externally examine the pure sky, and a person that is the color of smoke and one with the sky will be seen.
With six months meditative yoga becomes pure, earth’s treasures will be seen through earth’s openings.
Or move to the shadow of a tree, and in the heart of space, garlands of drops will form.
On the meaning of this verse he comments:
In an isolated place, turn your back to the sun.
In front of you look at your shadow with meditative-absorption placement.
Then look into the cloudless sky, and a shadow person will be seen. Look at this with the samādhi of meditative absorption.
If you meditate in this way for six months, the meditative absorption will become pure, and you will see the treasures beneath the earth.
Alternatively, sitting in the shadow of a tree with the shadow in front, meditate on meditative absorption.
Then look into space, stabilize with meditative-absorption meditation, and in six months you will see the treasures.225 He maintains that this passage from the tantra teaches an enhancement ritual.
Because the very next verse, 196, beginning “The śakti,”226 teaches the prāṇāyāma enhancement ritual, it may seem that the previous verse quoted above, beginning “Turn from the sun,” must similarly teach a meditative absorption enhancement ritual.
However these two verses are not similar.
The verse beginning “The śakti” describes the enhancement rituals of both withdrawal and prāṇāyāma, because it says in the Great Commentary, on verse 119 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, “Nāda meditation will be explained,”227 and the later verse that this line refers to is the one beginning “The śakti.” Therefore there is no question that the verse beginning “The śakti” describes the enhancement ritual for withdrawal and prāṇāyāma.
The verse beginning “Turn from the sun” is clearly a verse that describes the accomplishing of various feats, such as seeing the treasures beneath the earth.
Notes on Kālacakra says:
Meditative absorption is just the stabilizing of withdrawal. Therefore, if withdrawal  has been accomplished and meditative absorption meditation is performed, it is impossible not to achieve it.
However, if withdrawal has not been attained, there is no meditative-absorption meditation.
Therefore “and so forth” mainly refers to prāṇāyāma.228 This is an assertion that meditative absorption does not require an enhancement ritual. Prāṇāyāma: The Yoga of the Winds The branch of wind accomplishment This has two main outlines: 1.Prāṇāyāma:
The branch of bringing the winds into the dhūtī, having halted their flow in the left and right channels 2.Retention: The branch of stabilizing the winds in the dhūtī Prāṇāyāma: The branch of bringing the winds into the dhūtī, having halted their flow in the left and right channels
This is under six headings: 1.Meaning of the term prāṇāyāma
2.The time for the first meditation
3.Branches of the meditation
4.Valid cognition
5.Purification divisions
6.Results
Meaning of the term prāṇāyāma
Of the Sanskrit terms prāṇa and āyāma, prāṇa refers to the winds and āyāma can be rendered as “effort,” “stopping,” and “lengthening.” Affixing these three meanings to the term prāṇa results in the Tibetan translations, “wind exertion,” “wind stopping,” and “wind lengthening.” Here we are concerned with the second and third meanings.
In the Kālacakra, prāṇāyāma is taken to mean “wind stopping.” In the Guhyasamāja, prāṇa means “life” and āyāma means “to lengthen.” Therefore, in terms of the Kālacakra explanation, prāṇa refers to the winds such as the downward wind and so forth, and āyāma has the meaning of “stopping.” These winds are stopped from flowing in the left and right channels and brought into the dhūtī.
Moreover this can be confirmed if the grammatical formation of this term is explained.229 Concerning the Dhātusūtra passage “Prāṇa means life-holding,” the affix230 ac is added to the root.
The consonant c is a marker231 and therefore is dropped.
Concerning the Dhātusūtra line “Yamu means stopping,” the affix ghañ is added to the root.
Before the letter ya of the word yamu, the prefix232 āng is added.
The life letter u of the root mu is there for reasons of articulation,233 the ng of the prefix āng and the affix ghañ are markers and are therefore omitted.
Concerning the formation of the term, “Those joined to ñ and ṇ follow a and c” and “From aṇ, ac, aṭ, the nearby234 a is lengthened,” meaning that the life vowel a of the letter ya is lengthened. This results in the amalgamation, prāṇāyāma.
Added to that is the singular particle letter si from the first case.
The life vowel i of si is for articulation and is therefore dropped.
The s becomes a visarga, and the resulting term is prāṇāyāmaṃ.
On this Nāropa says; Concerning āyāma, “yamu means stopping.” Here the letter a of the root stops all conception. This is āyāmaṃ, which means that the paths of the life air and downward air are stopped and brought into the central channel.235 The time for the first meditation Some texts, thinking it to be the position of Jé Tsongkhapa, assert:
After the ten signs indicating that the winds have entered and dissolved within the central channel are complete and have been stabilized by meditative absorption, prāṇāyāma meditation is begun.236
However, not only do the ten signs of the winds dissolving not arise during withdrawal and meditative absorption, it is not even the position of Jé Tsongkhapa that such signs arise during prāṇāyāma.
His Notes on Kālacakra states:
The function of prāṇāyāma is to bring the winds into the central channel. However keeping the winds in the central channel is the function of retention.
Therefore asserting that this task is performed by prāṇāyāma is incorrect, because if prāṇāyāma also accomplished the keeping of winds in the central channel, what would be the purpose of meditating on the branch of retention?
Therefore the function of prāṇāyāma is to bring the winds into the central channel, and when the signs of winds having entered the central channel clearly and unmistakably arise, that function is complete.237 Therefore, if it is not the function of prāṇāyāma to even hold the winds in the central channel, how could it possibly dissolve them?
Furthermore the previous text says:
Then one meditates for an extended period, and for however long one sits, inhalation and exhalation of breath become progressively shorter.
When inhalation and exhalation have stopped, the winds abide completely.
In the Guhyasamāja and other tantras, it is taught that vajra recitation brings about the abiding that is the severing of inhalation and exhalation as well as the dissolving, and that this in turn induces the innate bliss. It would be incorrect to say that vajra recitation is able to bring about such a result in the context of Guhyasamāja but is not able to here. However this passage is also refuted by the above quote from Notes on Kālacakra. How do those explanations from the Kālacakra tradition and those from the Guhyasamāja and others  differ on this topic?
Notes on Kālacakra states:
In general the highest yoga tantras talk of the winds entering the dhūtī, dwelling in the dhūtī, and dissolving in the dhūtī.
Here dissolving in the dhūtī is referred to as “binding,” “mixing,” and “killing” the winds, whereas entering and abiding are spoken of as being separate branches.
These are the branch of prāṇāyāma, which halts the flow of winds in the left and right channels and brings them into the dhūtī, and the branch of retention, which keeps the winds in the dhūtī.238
This passage is saying that in the Guhyasamāja and other tantras, during the practices of body isolation and speech isolation, for example, penetrative focusing on the points of the body will bring about the entering, abiding, and the dissolving of the winds in the dhūtī during one continuous practice.
However here the branch of prāṇāyāma that brings the winds into the dhūtī and the branch of retention that keeps them there are two separate methods and, moreover, are two separate branches within the six-branched yoga. The above passage also says that dissolving the winds in the dhūtī, referred to here as “killing the winds,” occurs in the sixth branch, meditative concentration.
Moreover the tantra, the Great Commentary, and other authoritative commentaries, which act as sources for the Notes on Kālacakra, do not even mention the abiding and dissolving of the winds in the central channel in any of the chapters up to the branch of prāṇāyāma.
Our own position is that when the empty forms of withdrawal and meditative absorption have been seen and stabilized, the branch of prāṇāyāma, as illustrated by the vase yoga, should begin. The Great Commentary, on verse 117 of the Gnosis chapter, says: Then, “when form is seen, each day the winds are to be halted” refers to the vase yoga.239 Similarly Nāropa, in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations, teaches that prāṇāyāma meditation begins immediately after the completion of meditative absorption:
The lines on prāṇāyāma begin, “When images of form are seen.” When miragelike and dreamlike images of fully aspected form are seen, “meditate constantly on prāṇāyāma” and halt the life and downward winds with filling, vase, and expelling yogas.240
These words refute the suggestion  that meditation on prāṇāyāma not preceded by the practices of withdrawal and meditative absorption will develop into the correct path. Branches of the meditation This is under four outlines:
1.Identifying the path of prāṇāyāma 2.Divisions
3.The meditation
4.Enhancement ritual Identifying the path of prāṇāyāma The appearance of the empty-form Kālacakra in mother-and-father embrace within the center of the navel cakra, indivisible from the clear-light mind that has arisen from a very special entry of winds into the central channel brought on by the prāṇāyāma practices of vajra recitation and vase yoga, is the path of prāṇāyāma.
This is taught by the Great Commentary on verse 120 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter:
“Purified by prāṇāyāma” means that when the yogi is “divorced from the paths of the sun and moon” and is constantly within the central channel, he will be purified by the prāṇāyāma and therefore will be “praised by the bodhisattvas.”241
What is to be purified?
The clear-light mind and the empty forms that are of the same nature as this mind are the phenomena to be purified. What is the purifier?
It is prāṇāyāma practice, which induces the special entry of the winds into the central channel. This occurs when the sun and moon right and left channels are divorced from their flows of wind.
“Therefore,” which means because of this purification, the yogi will be “praised by the bodhisattvas.” The empty-form Kālacakra in mother-and-father embrace as the actual path of prāṇāyāma is taught by verse 122 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter:
The winds enter the center, divorced of objects, embracing Viśvamātā.242
That this phenomenon appears in the center of the navel cakra is taught by the Great Commentary on verse 120 of the Gnosis chapter:
“In the center of the two winds meeting” means in the center at the navel, where the life wind and downward wind meet. “The arising and engaging in the objects by object-engagers,” such as eyes and so forth, at the navel is a topic that has been discussed previously. The word “objects” is without a grammatical case.
“Apprehending the signs of smoke and so forth also” is by way of the avadhūtī.
The word “also” refers again to the navel.243
How does this passage teach that the empty form appears in the center of the navel cakra?
It does so like this.
By meditating on the vase yoga of prāṇāyāma, the life-sustaining wind and the downwardly expelling wind meet at “at the navel,” meaning at the center of the navel cakra, where the arising and engaging of object-engagers such as eyes focusing on objects such as forms and so forth has been halted.
Because of this, the empty-form signs of smoke and so forth, and especially the empty-form Kālacakra in mother-father embrace, are perceived.
Where are they seen?
“By way of the avadhūtī” means inside the avadhūtī.
The word “also” means inside the dhūtī in the center of the navel cakra.
The way that the process of object-engagers such as eyes engaging in objects such as forms and so forth has been halted “is a topic that has been discussed previously” in the section on withdrawal. Therefore, in this section on prāṇāyāma also, wherever one focuses within the dhūtī, there the winds will gather, and at that particular place an empty-form Kālacakra in mother-father embrace will definitely arise of its own accord, unconceived and unimputed by the mind. Therefore, during vajra recitation, when the empty form at the upper end of the dhūtī enters and mixes with winds, there is no need for a separate visualization of it arriving at the navel.
This is because the power of vase yoga will bring the life and downward winds to meet at the navel, and the union of these two winds is meditatively focused on inside the dhūtī at the center of the navel. There empty forms will appear by their own volition, unimputed and unconceived by the mind, as taught by the above passage from the Great Commentary.
Divisions
The dharma master Butön and other masters of the past talk of six divisions, namely, vajra recitation, inhalation, filling, expelling, vase yoga, and racaka,244 or “particle limit.” However Notes on Kālacakra says:
The tantra and commentary mention only vajra recitation and vase yoga, and these two will accomplish the purpose. Although the tantra teaches no more than these two, they do not need supplementing.245
This position should be accepted, and because the other wind yogas mentioned above are similar in not having any focus upon the central channel, it is difficult to see how they could be prāṇāyāma practices for bringing the winds into the central channel.
Therefore vajra recitation and vase yoga are the two divisions of prāṇāyāma. Vajra Recitation The meditation This has two main outlines: 1.Vajra recitation
2.Vase yoga
Vajra recitation
This is under two headings:
1.The function or actual purpose of vajra recitation 2.The meditation The function or actual purpose of vajra recitation The Great Commentary, on verse 116 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
“In the prāṇāyāma meditations also the two pathways,” referring to the left and right pathway, “collapse,” meaning are blocked, and winds enter the central pathway.246
Similarly the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says: Prāṇāyāma means blocking the left and right paths of lalanā and rasanā so that the winds are constantly in the avadhūtī.247 As these quotes say, by the meditations of vajra recitation and vase yoga,  the flow of winds in the right and left channels is stopped and directed to enter only the central channel. This is the function of both types of prāṇāyāma.
The tantra’s use of the plural “meditations” indicates that it is referring to the functions of both prāṇāyāma practices, and although it does not describe vajra recitation directly, it does teach vase yoga.
In the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary, vajra recitation and vase yoga meditations are both described, as will be understood from the following presentations. The meditation This is under five headings: 1.Place of meditation 2.Body posture
3.Eye position 4.The focus and method of the meditation 5.Signs of accomplishment Place of meditation The place of meditation is the same as described in the section on withdrawal.
Body posture This is the same as described in withdrawal and meditative absorption, the only difference being that the heel of the right foot does not block the anus but presses against the base of the vajra. Eye position The eye position is explained as being the “look of amṛtavarta.” Amṛtavarta has an interpretive and definitive description. In the interpretive, as described in withdrawal, the eyes are turned upward and look toward the location of the white bodhicitta nectar in the dhūtī between the eyebrows.
The definitive description is found in the Later Guhyasamāja:
During near accomplishment
the image of amṛtavarta.248 Explaining this verse, the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says:
Using provisional language, “the image of amṛtavarta” refers to the winds.249
The eyes themselves cannot look at the winds, and so it is the mental consciousness that actually looks, and this refers to focusing upon the entering, abiding, and leaving of the winds during vajra recitation and upon the life and downward winds joining at the navel during vase yoga.
The focus and method of the meditation
This is clearly taught in the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary: Prāṇāyāma means blocking the left and right paths of lalanā and rasanā so that the winds are constantly in the avadhūtī central channel. In the yogas of filling, vase, and arising, the syllable oṃ in the avadhūtī brings about the entering,  the syllable hūḥ brings about the halting, and the syllable āḥ creates the arising. The yogi meditates on these, whose natures are the moon, Rāhu, and sun. This is prāṇāyāma.250
How does this passage teach the focus of meditation?
The first sentence shows the purpose or function of vajra recitation by stating that the winds are stopped from flowing in the left and right channels and are made to flow constantly in the central channel.
How is this achieved?
By filling the dhūtī with wind, by vase yoga, and by arising yoga.
How are these performed? The innate tone of the breath entering arises as the sound of oṃ, the moon body-vajra syllable, and is visualized as entering the dhūtī. The innate tone possessed by the breath abiding internally arises as the sound of hūḥ, the Rāhu mind-vajra syllable.
It is visualized as abiding in the dhūtī, which is the meaning of “vase” and “halting.” The innate tone of the breath being expelled arises as the sound of the syllable āḥ, whose nature is the sun speech vajra and is visualized as being expelled from the dhūtī. This is “arising.” This is vajra recitation meditation. Nāropa in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations cites this explanation from the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary: Prāṇāyāma means blocking the left and right paths of lalanā and rasanā, from which the winds constantly enter the avadhūtī.
In the avadhūtī, by the yogas of filling, vase, and expelling, the syllable oṃ brings about the entering, the syllable hūḥ brings about the halting, and the syllable āḥ creates the arising. The yogi accomplishes those whose natures are the moon, Rāhu, and sun. This is the branch of prāṇāyāma. Some lamas focus on the winds coming and going from the right and left channels and so forth and then consider it unnecessary to visualize the winds entering and leaving the central channel. This method of vajra recitation is well refuted by the two passages above, which talk of “the syllable oṃ in the avadhūtī brings about the entering,” etc., and “In the avadhūtī, by the yogas of filling, vase, and expelling,” etc.
In the great vow251 section of the Gnosis chapter it says:
The definitive meaning is that at all times it is stabilized, and at all times during the vase yoga, the yogi meditates on the winds that enter and arise as being in the central channel.252 Some lamas say that the “vase yoga” mentioned here refers only to the stage of abiding, the inhalation and exhalation having been stopped by the power of vajra recitation.
This is incorrect, because it is not the position of Jé Tsongkhapa as explained previously.
Moreover the Great Commentary talks of “winds entering the central pathway.”253 The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary talks of “the winds constantly entering the avadhūtī.”254 These quotes point out that it is the constant flow of wind in and out of the central channel and not the stage of abiding that accomplishes the function of vajra recitation. So what does the above passage from the Gnosis chapter mean?
That will be explained below. Three Bodhisattva Commentaries speaks of the entering wind being assigned to the syllable oṃ, the abiding wind as assigned to hūḥ, and the wind being expelled as assigned to āḥ. In the Great Illusion Tantra the expelling is assigned to oṃ and the abiding to hūḥ.
The Guhyasamāja speaks of the entering wind as oṃ, the abiding wind as āṃ, and the wind being expelled as hūḥ.
Although there are differences in the way the syllables are assigned, there are no differences insofar as they are all prāṇāyāma yogas that block the flow of wind in the right and left channels and bring it into the central channel.
Therefore the innate tone of the breath entering, abiding, and leaving is visualized as the appropriate sound of the three syllables. However the disagreement that arises on the tantra’s position when trying to establish which of the innate tones of the three breath stages are assigned to which sounds of the three syllables is confusing and should be examined.
The Great Commentary says:
Here there is no counting or saying of mantra, but together with the breath entering and leaving, concentrate on the letters of the mantra entering and leaving like a garland of flowers, in the nature of moon and sun, and in forward and reverse order.
In this way, inwardly the yogi performs 108,000 recitations in five days.255 In five hundred days the yogi recites on 10.8 million breaths.
Then the body becomes pure. Likewise the speech is purified and similarly the mind.
In this way the breath of fifteen hundred days remains unmoving, and the state of the vase wind is achieved. The yogis will develop the five kinds of clairvoyance, and with the perfect flow of winds in the left, right, and central channels, this is the vajra recitation and neutral recitation.
This has been determined by the Buddha.
The definitive meaning is that at all times it is stabilized, and at all times during the vase yoga, the yogi meditates on the winds that enter and arise as being in the central channel.
Using these passages as a basis, Butön Rinpoché256 explains that the letters of the great-vow ḍāka and ḍākinī mantras intertwined with the seventy-two-line mantra are recited like a threaded flower garland upon the twelve major movements of wind,257 each of which is divided into five elemental mandalas to make sixty, to which is added the twelve flows of gnosis wind that occur between each of the twelve movements, to make seventy-two in total.
These letters are recited in forward order for the entering and the abiding, which are in the nature of the moon and Rāhu respectively, and in reverse order for the arising, which is in the nature of the sun.
If this is done with no distraction and no interruption, then in one day 21,600 recitations are performed.
In three blocks of five hundred days each, the body, speech, and mind are purified, and one has reached the time for vase yoga.
Therefore he posits the above passages as being the tantra and commentary description of the completion-stage vajra recitation of the branch of prāṇāyāma.
Other texts that claim to be commentaries in keeping with the position of Jé Tsongkhapa and his disciples also explain this passage from the commentary as a description of the vajra recitation of prāṇāyāma from the six-branched yoga.
I cannot see these claims as being correct, because in a preceding passage that comments on the tantra lines “the letters of wisdom and method,” which teach these mantra recitations applied to breaths like garlands of flowers, the Great Commentary says:
The text speaks of reciting mantras in order to achieve worldly powers.258 Therefore the recitations of this passage are for the achievement of worldly powers. Also the line “together with the breath entering and leaving, concentrate on the letters of the mantra entering and leaving like a garland of flowers” describes a recitation in which the forms of the mantra syllables are strung together like a garland of flowers on the thread of the entering and leaving breath. Focusing on the winds and mantras as being separate in this way and focusing on the forms of the mantras is incompatible with vajra recitation. Moreover, in the above description, focus is placed on the winds of the twelve major movements, which flow within the left and right channels.
However, in vajra recitation, the winds are to be visualized as entering and leaving the central channel.
Furthermore the Great Commentary in that section says: The inseparable branch, the winds together with the mantras, are recited by the mind.259 This explains that the mantra recitation of that passage is mental recitation. Moreover the Great Commentary refers to the mental recitation of the generation stage as vajra recitation.
Therefore, although the passage talks of “vajra recitation and neutral recitation,” it must be the intention of the tantra merely to label mental recitation as vajra recitation. Others say that the eyes and the mind are focused within the dhūtī between the eyebrows, and merely by single-pointed concentration a very special empty form will appear due to the power of previous familiarity.
Self-pride is placed in this empty form, and when the winds are inhaled, the mind, which has become one with the empty form, merges with the winds so that winds, mind, and empty form are not regarded as separate entities but are merged in the mind. This is single-pointedly concentrated upon, and during its gradual descent from within the upper opening of the dhūtī, its tone is visualized as the actual sound “oṃ.” This process is asserted as being part of the profound focus of vajra recitation meditation. However, if examined, it can be seen to be faulty.
When the eyes and the mind are focused in the dhūtī between the eyebrows and a very special empty form appears just by the power of single-pointed concentration, the flow of winds in the right and left channels will typically have been severed and brought to the central channel. Specifically this is the time of the completion of meditative absorption. Therefore, as the line “cessation of arising consciousness and objects of consciousness”260 explains, the object and object-engager connection, which refers to the six consciousnesses of sight and so forth engaging the six objects, form and so forth, has been cut because the winds, or mounts of those consciousnesses, have been brought into the central channel. Therefore, at that particular time, the consciousness of hearing and the bodily consciousness do not engage their objects of sound and bodily sensation.
Therefore how would it be possible to visualize the gradual descent from within the upper opening of the dhūtī as emitting the sound oṃ?
Furthermore, when beginning the practice of vajra recitation, even if the actual status of the winds is that they are still flowing in the left and right channels, one nevertheless practices by visualizing them as entering the central channel.
According to the above assertion, however, the time for beginning the practice of vajra recitation is when a very special empty form appears due to the power of the winds having already entered the central channel.
Therefore at that time you would have to say that the winds were already entering and leaving the central channel. How could that be correct? Through this and other reasons a lot of damage can be done to this assertion.
To summarize our own position on vajra recitation meditation: the eyes and body are positioned as previously explained, and at the beginning of the practice of vajra recitation, regardless of whether the winds are actually flowing in the right or left channels or the central channel, the incoming breath is visualized as descending within the central channel to arrive at the center of the navel cakra. There it remains for however long the duration of one breath may be.
When it arises, it does so again through the central channel.
The innate tone261 of the breath entering is visualized as oṃ, the innate tone of abiding as hūḥ, and the innate tone of leaving or arising is visualized as āḥ.
This process is to be single-pointedly concentrated upon. The actual way the mantras are applied to the winds is that the innate tones of the breaths resonate as the sounds of the three syllables as if they were actually being heard.
The reason why it takes place in the central channel within the very center of the navel cakra is that although in the branches of withdrawal and meditative absorption the special empty form appears within the upper opening of the central channel, from the branch of prāṇāyāma onward it has to be an appearance in the central channel at the center of the navel cakra. The reason why is stated by Khedrup Jé in Illuminating Reality: The special empty-form mudra as an actual phenomenon is first developed on the branch of recollection.
This is taught as an empty form arising from the winds entering, abiding, and dissolving within the avadhūtī at the center of the navel cakra. Therefore the special cause that induces the special innate gnosis is first developed at the navel cakra. Because of this the navel cakra is spoken of as the innate deity form. This is a special assertion of my omniscient master.262 An actual empty-form Kālacakra in mother-and-father embrace that is not just an appearance within the mind of the yogi is first developed during the branch of recollection, and the place where it is developed is in the central channel at the center of the navel cakra.
The foundation and immediate cause of this special empty form is the empty-form Kālacakra in mother-and-father embrace developed during the branches of prāṇāyāma and retention, which arises unconceived and unimputed within the yogi’s mind. This too must arise in the central channel at the center of the navel cakra.
For the arising of such an appearance, the winds must abide in the central channel at the navel cakra during retention and must enter the central channel at the same location during prāṇāyāma.
Therefore vajra recitation is applied to the processes of entering, abiding, and arising at the navel, and it is in that location that vase yoga holds the winds together in union.
What does it mean to say, “the navel cakra is spoken of as the innate deity form”?
This is taught by the twenty-seventh verse of the Inner chapter, which says:
At the secret, crown, and navel also, the innate form of the Buddha, without and with nature.263 On this verse the Great Commentary says:
Therefore, at the secret lotus, the crown lotus, and the navel lotus, the pure form, the supreme deity. Without nature, and unimputed, its nature is like form in a clairvoyant’s mirror.264
To summarize:
during the practices of the six-branched yoga, sometimes the winds are entering the central channel, sometimes the process of entering is at its peak, sometimes the winds abide in the central channel,  and sometimes the winds are “killed” or dissolved in the central channel.
By the power of these processes, the clear light, whose nature is the primordial mind, appears in unification with its images at all stages within the meditations of the six yogas. These images are empty forms, especially the countless saṃbhogakāya forms, which appear like phenomena in a clairvoyant’s mirror.
Although the final clear light cannot be actualized until the attainment of omniscience, nevertheless, when the winds are initially brought into the central channel by the power of meditation, a little of the clear-light mind is experienced. During the stages of peak entering, abiding, and dissolution, the clear-light mind becomes progressively clearer, and the empty forms also become clearer.
At the stages of withdrawal and meditative absorption, the empty forms are seen with fleshly eye consciousness.
From the completion of meditative absorption, when clairvoyance is gained, until the completion of prāṇāyāma, retention, and recollection, and for as long as there is no separation from desire for the union of the two organs, the empty forms are seen with the clairvoyance of the celestial eye.
From the completion of the branch of recollection, in which a mahāmudrā consort has been actually created and separation from desire for the karma and wisdom mudrā consorts is attained, the empty forms are seen with the buddha eye.
From the very first moment of attaining the unchanging bliss on the first of the twelve bodhisattva levels, the forms are seen with the eye of wisdom.
When the perfect and complete enlightenment is attained, empty forms are seen with the eye of gnosis. Verse 232 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter says:
Objects of celestial sight are two, those of inferential and of direct cognition.
With the application of direct cognition, manifold saṃbhogakāya forms arise, like stars in the sky.265 On this the Great Commentary says:
There is direct and inferential cognition. With the application of direct cognition, “manifold saṃbhogakāya forms arise, like stars in the sky,” meaning like a host of stars, the forms are seen with the fleshly eye and so forth, and the three worlds and the three times are like dreams and illusions.
Here initially the beginner yogi without clairvoyance sees various forms with the fleshly eye.
Then, with the attainment of clairvoyance, they are seen by the celestial eye.
With the attainment of separation from desire, they are seen by the buddha eye.
With the attainment of the bodhisattva stages, they are seen by the eye of wisdom.
With the attainment of full and perfect enlightened mind, they are seen by the gnosis eye, “freed from remainder.” In this way the fleshly eye of the tathāgata and the other sights that make up the five eyes are for the seeing of emptiness.
Other living beings are blind to the objects seen within the view of emptiness.266 If this passage is analyzed, it can be understood that any part of the six-branched yoga is solely a time of meditative equipoise on the winds entering, abiding, or dissolving in the central channel, within which empty forms will definitely arise. In the illusionlike postmeditation times when the winds flow in the right and left channels, the empty forms do not appear.
For example, in Guhyasamāja thinking, it is only in the meditative equipoise of the winds entering, abiding, and dissolving in the central channel that the clear light along with the appearances, increases, and attainments of the path will definitely occur, whereas these are not experienced in the postmeditation sessions.
With this in mind Jé Tsongkhapa and his disciples maintain that although an actual empty-form mahāmudrā consort is achieved from the branch of recollection onward, its continuum is cut during the postmeditation times and only achieved in the meditative equipoise sessions of the branches of recollection and meditative concentration.267 Signs of accomplishment
These can be understood from Notes on Kālacakra, which says:
Lamas of the past have mentioned the heat of bliss, seeing the channels, and the colors of the winds and so on.
Seeing the channels and the colors of the winds is the result of practice. However being able to see the cakras and then the colors of the moving winds, as well as being able to see many worlds, is like seeing visions in a dream, and although some may be genuine, they are unreliable.
The Vajra Garland teaches that when the isolation of the body is complete, vajra recitation should be performed for six months, and that in the fourth month the colors of the cakras are seen. This is an actual sight of the cakras, and although this is a common experience of vajra recitation meditation,  the most important thing is that the unmistaken signs of the winds having entered the dhūtī must arise.268 Vase Yoga This has two main headings: 1.The function or purpose of vase yoga
2.The actual meditation The function or purpose of vase yoga The function or purpose of vase yoga is to mix the life-sustaining and downwardly expelling winds at the navel and to ignite the caṇḍālī fire. The actual meditation This is under five headings: 1.Place of meditation 2.Posture 3.Positioning of eyes
4.Focus and method of meditation 5.Signs of accomplishment The first three topics are as described in the section on vajra recitation. Focus and method of meditation Holding the winds inside without letting them enter or leave can also be explained as vase yoga and is found in the lower tantras.
Moreover it has been taught that vase yoga is found in the non-Buddhist Sāṃkhya tradition.
Pandit Kṣitigarbha269 said that it is difficult to differentiate the wind yogas of non-Buddhists and those of the mother tantras.270 Lamas of the past have maintained that they are differentiated on the basis of their view and by whether or not they encompass bodhicitta but not on the basis of being wind yogas.
Although it may seem that the different vase yogas are not differentiated by their individual characteristics, there is actually a huge difference in the fundamental features of these yogas.
Generally, in the Sāṃkhya tradition, there is no bringing together of upper and lower winds, and specifically there is no inducing of the innate great bliss by uniting and holding the winds in the centers of the cakras as taught in the highest yoga tantras.
Vase yoga in which the winds are merely kept inside without leaving or entering can be found in non-Buddhist traditions and in the lower tantras. Therefore a special vase yoga meditation is necessary here, and that will be explained. It is under two headings:
1.How it is presented in the tantra and commentary 2.The actual focus and method of the meditation How it is presented in the tantra and commentary The Great Commentary, on verse 117 of the Gnosis chapter, teaches the need for vase yoga and its duration:
Then, “when form is seen each day, the winds are to be halted” refers to the vase yoga. “Until mandalas of light are seen to encircle the entire body”: these are within and emerging from the forms previously mentioned.271
The way vase yoga is practiced is taught in verse 194, an “easy to understand” verse of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter:
Mouth too is closed, and from the two nostrils all outer wind is drawn in by the power of prāṇāyāma
and joined with pure lightninglike downward wind.
From familiarization with the yoga over time, moon and sun are as one in the center of fire.
In the body thirst and hunger are destroyed, and freedom from death too is granted.272 The mouth is closed, and the outer wind is drawn in through the two nostrils by the power of the life-sustaining upper wind. This is joined with the downwardly expelling lower wind, whose color is yellow, like that of pure lightning, in the central channel at the center of the navel cakra. From the practice of this yoga over a long time, the winds that flow in the moon left channel and the sun right channel are as one in the “center of fire,” meaning inside the central channel at the center of the Kālāgni, or navel cakra.
The immediate benefits of completing the vase yoga are that thirst and hunger are destroyed and freedom from death is granted.
Therefore do not think that these words from the tantra do not clearly teach that the uniting of the winds is to be meditated upon within the central channel.
This verse definitely teaches that when familiarization with this practice has been fully developed, the life and downward winds of the left and right channels are as one inside the central channel, and for that to happen these two winds must be brought together in the central channel.
Furthermore Notes on Kālacakra quotes a verse from Later Guhyasamāja that says: Breath, the nature of the five wisdoms,
the nature of the five elements,
uprooted as a globe-shaped form,
meditate at the tip of the nose.273 Notes on Kālacakra goes on to explain how the commentary on this verse, as found in the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary, clearly teaches vase yoga.
Notes on Kālacakra first corrects the translation — “In some translations ‘globe-shaped form’ is rendered ‘amassed form’”274 — and then continues with the explanation.
The way that the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary explains this verse from the tantra is as follows:
The term “five jewels” refers to the phenomena of the five rasanā mandalas, which are the five elements of earth and so forth.
Breath in the nature of the five elements is of the nature of the five jewels, and is in the right nostril.
Likewise the phenomena that are the five lalanā mandalas of the five buddhas are the five aggregates — consciousness and so forth.
The winds blessed by these are in the left nostril.
“Globe-shaped” in the line “up rooted as a globe-shaped form” means the life winds of the left and right mandalas are as one in the avadhūtī.
The life winds are “uprooted as a globe-shaped form, meditate upon the tip of the nose.” The word “nose” here is used to mean the lotuses of the navel, heart, throat, forehead, and crown.
Here, to meditate at the tip, as in the line “meditate at the tip of the nose,” refers to the center of the navel at the location of right and other lotus petals.275 This passage needs to be explained a little.
The term “five jewels” refers to the breath that possesses the nature of the five elements or mandalas of earth, water, fire, air, and space, and that flows through the right rasanā channel and through the right nostril. The term “five buddhas” refers to the breath that possesses the nature of five aggregates of consciousness, and so forth, and that flows through the left lalanā channel and through the left nostril. These winds become as one globe-shaped form or one “amassed form,” which is “uprooted” or “led” through the avadhūtī.
“Nose” in the line “meditate at the tip of the nose” is used here to mean the lotuses, or cakras, of the navel, heart, throat, forehead, and crown.
The “tip” refers to the central dhūtī of those cakras.
The term “nose” refers to the cakras, but at the tips of which cakra is one to meditate?
The line “meditate at the tip of the nose” means to meditate within the dhūtī at the center of “the location of the right and other lotus petals,” meaning the right and left channel petals of the navel.
That this is the meaning of the above passage is confirmed by Notes on Kālacakra:
This is clearly explained in the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary, in which a verse from the Later Guhyasamāja is quoted:
“Breath, the nature of five wisdoms,
the nature of the five elements,
uprooted as a globe-shaped form,
meditate at the tip of the nose.”
In some translations “globe-shaped form” is rendered “amassed form.” Therefore the five mandala winds, whose natures are the five wisdoms and which flow individually through both channels, become as one amassed form, which is “uprooted” or “led” through the avadhūtī.
“Tip of the nose” refers to the cakras, and therefore “tip of the nose” here refers to examining, or meditating, in the center of the navel cakra.276
Similarly Nāropa in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations, when explaining the meaning of just this one verse, which begins “Breath, the nature of five wisdoms,” says very clearly: This talks of the third branch.
The five wisdoms from the line “Breath, the nature of five wisdoms” are the five buddhas, Akṣobhya and so forth, referring to the five aggregates of consciousness and so forth, which are phenomena of the lalanā mandalas.
Breath, which is of their nature, is in the left nostril.
Here the term “five elements” refers to the element of earth and so forth, phenomena of the rasanā mandalas. Breath, which is of their nature, is in the right nostril. “Globe-shaped,” from the line “uprooted as a globe-shaped form,” refers to the life winds of the right and left mandalas together as one in the avadhūtī.
That wind is “uprooted as a globe-shaped form,” and the “nose” of the phrase “tip of the nose” refers to the centers of the navel, heart, throat, forehead, and crown lotuses.
Having uprooted the winds, “meditate at the tip of the nose” refers to the meditation, which is in the center of the navel but not on the left and right lotus petals.277 The meaning of most of this passage is similar to that expressed by the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary passage.
The meaning of the lines from “the nose of the phrase,”  up to “which is in the center of the navel but not on the left and right lotus petals” is that the first part, from “the nose” up to “crown lotuses,” identifies the nose of the phrase “tip of the nose.” The “winds,” or life-sustaining upper winds, that flow through the left and right channels are “uprooted,” or led, solely through the pathway of the dhūtī and meditated upon in the dhūtī in the center of the “tip of the nose,” or navel cakra.
From where are the winds led?
From the nostrils, down through the dhūtī, to the center of the crown-channel lotus, through the forehead, throat, and heart lotuses and as far as the dhūtī at the center of the lotus of the navel cakra.
The winds are not led through the “left and right lotus petals” and left and right channels.
This rough explanation of the scriptural description of the purpose of vase yoga focused on the dhūtī leads to the second outline: The actual focus and method of the meditation This is under four headings:
1.The order of drawing the upper and lower winds 2.The pathways from where winds are drawn 3.Mental placement on the winds drawn and brought together 4.Duration of meditation
The order of drawing the upper and lower winds
Notes on Kālacakra says:
Ordinarily, when life-sustaining wind leaves from the upper opening, downwardly expelling wind leaves from the lower opening.
When life-sustaining wind enters, downwardly expelling wind enters and reaches as far as the navel. Therefore it is possible to bring them together and bind them simultaneously.278 However, in the Guhyasamāja Completion Stage,279 it says that the upper and lower winds are drawn one after the other. Whatever the case, here they are to be drawn one after the other.
The place of meditation, posture, and position of eyes are arranged as they were in vajra recitation.
When drawing in the winds, the upper, life-sustaining wind must be drawn in first if you do not have the instructions for preventing the emission of bodhicitta.
If you draw in the lower, downwardly expelling wind first, there is a danger of bodhicitta emission, which must be avoided.
If you have the instruction on the prevention of bodhicitta emission, it is taught that drawing in the lower wind first is acceptable. The pathways from where winds are drawn
For the upper, life-sustaining wind, the mouth is closed,  and with one of the yogas of “taking from above,” “taking from below,” or yogama, the wind is slowly drawn through both nostrils and pulled down the dhūtī until it reaches the center of the navel cakra. There it is focused on and added to without allowing it to stray upward. After that the lower, downwardly expelling wind is drawn up through the dhūtī from the two lower orifices to the center of the navel cakra, where it is to be focused upon.
Both winds are held and added to without being allowed to stray up or down.
Mental placement on the winds drawn and brought together The life-sustaining upper wind and downwardly expelling lower winds are drawn through the dhūtī as far as the navel. This unites the two winds inside the dhūtī at the center of the navel cakra, where the dhūtī is constricted by the knots of the right and left channels. These united winds are then the focus of a single-pointed placement of mind.
The purpose of focusing on the winds themselves in vase yoga is found in the quote beginning “The look of Vighnantaka,” which explains that prāṇāyāma is practiced with the look of Vighnantaka.
The definitive Vighnantaka, or amṛtavarta, is said to be the winds. The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says:
“The images of amṛtavarta” refers to the winds using provisional language.280
The prāṇāyāma vase yoga taught here is performed after vajra recitation, and the measure of vajra recitation completion is that just by focusing on the vajra recitation objects of meditation, the winds are stopped from flowing in the left and right channels and move constantly within the central channel. Because of this, empty-form signs of the winds having entered the central channel will appear without fail and in the correct order.
When vajra recitation has been mastered and the yogi begins to engage in the practice of vase yoga, a little vajra recitation is first performed to bring the winds into the central channel, after which the upper wind is slowly led down through the central channel.
The reason for this is that the tantra states that external wind is drawn in and moves through the nostrils:
Mouth too is closed, and from the two nostrils all outer wind is drawn in by the power of prāṇāyāma.281
If wind enters through the nostrils, it has to then move through the central channel and in order for the winds to move through the central channel, the first moments of vase yoga must be preceded  by a vajra recitation that brings the winds to the central channel.
The mind is single-pointedly placed upon the upper and lower winds brought together inside the dhūtī at the center of the navel cakra. Wherever the mind and winds dwell within the dhūtī at the navel, there an empty-form Kālacakra will appear by its own volition unconceived by the mind. Therefore any practice that involves drawing down mind and winds, indivisibly united, in order to merge them with this Kālacakra empty form makes no sense. From the branch of meditative absorption onward, the appearances of the primordial clear-light mind and its special empty forms are no longer separate subjects and objects and appear indivisibly as one, thereby enabling self-pride to be assigned to the special empty-form Kālacakra in mother-and-father embrace. Similarly, in all instances from prāṇāyāma onward, wherever mind and winds are focused within the central channel, there mind and winds will enter, thereby enabling a natural, uncontrived self-pride to be assigned to each of the special empty forms that arise there.
The special causes of this are the ability to place a natural uncontrived self-pride in the main deity developed during generation-stage practices and similar concentration practices developed in the branch of meditative absorption.
The teachings here on vase yoga are for the special disciples of the tantra, those “jewellike persons” who have undertaken all preceding practices of the generation and completion stages. Beginners in vase yoga who have not accomplished these previous practices should learn vase yoga methods from the teachings of the gurus. Duration of meditation Meditation on the winds held together should continue until the head begins to hurt, until the yogi sees his body encircled by light, or until the heart starts to jump.
If meditation continues after these signs appear, there is a danger of death.
If one dies under these circumstances, what happens?
If death occurs, the yogi should place concentration one-pointedly on the empty forms, and by doing so he will actualize a realm of great bliss. This is what will actually occur.
However the previous advice is given to avoid gaining the bad reputation of being a yogi who meditates on the path and then dies.
Verse 121 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter says:
Prāṇāyāma grants fruits of complete equalized bliss, desirable for as long as the head is.
Beyond that it produces the undesirable, the fear of death, cause of definite destruction of aggregates.
To leave through the opening at the crown without doubt joins one to a place of great bliss.
Without aggregates, the yogi finds blissful peace, but he has no reputation in the world.282 On this verse the Great Commentary says:
When he sees the empty forms, the yogi performs prāṇāyāma “for as long as the head is,” which means until the head begins to hurt.
This will grant the fruits of equalized bliss.
“Beyond that” means that going beyond the bounds of a painful head will produce “the undesirable, the fear of death,” a cause of the loss of the aggregates.
If, by the power of yoga, the prāṇāyāma moves through the opening at the crown, the yogi is joined “to a place of great bliss,” meaning to the empty forms. “Without doubt” means definitely.
And further: “But he has no reputation in the world” means a reputation that “this yogi has died.”283 Signs of accomplishment
The Great Commentary says:
“In the center of the two winds meeting” means in the center at the navel, where the life wind and downward wind meet. “The arising and engaging in the objects by object-engagers” such as eyes and so forth at the navel is a topic that has been discussed previously. The word “object” is a without a grammatical case. “Apprehending the signs of smoke and so forth, also” is by way of the avadhūtī.
The word “also” refers again to the navel.284
This passage, as previously explained, teaches that the life and downward winds are merged within the dhūtī at the center of the navel cakra. The winds that are the mounts of the six consciousnesses enter this union, resulting in the severing of the six types of objects, form and so forth, from their object-engaging consciousnesses.
This in turn produces a definite and ordered sequence of signs, such as smoke and so forth, and particularly the appearance of many saṃbhogakāya forms in the aspect of Kālacakra mother-and-father embrace within a hair-sized black line to which self-pride is assigned. This appears clearly in the midst of this union of life and downward winds. Furthermore this union of life and downward winds ignites the caṇḍālī fire at the navel. This melts the bodhicitta element, which then falls,  and without emerging from the tip of the jewel, induces the four joys of descent and the four joys of stable ascent, in which the bodhicitta increases to reach to the forehead cakra.
This great bliss is applied to aspected and nonaspected emptiness. These meditations are the primary signs of accomplishment, while seeing the colors of the channels and their winds are common signs. How does the completion of vase yoga induce the four joys of descent?
The Great Commentary says:
Then, “when form is seen each day, the winds are to be halted” refers to the vase yoga. “Until mandalas of light are seen to encircle the entire body”:
these are within and from the forms previously mentioned. This passage teaches the activity and measure of completion of prāṇāyāma vase yoga.
The text continues: Then, devoid of the inferior sensation of the union of the two organs, “in six months, the meditator who is a beginner in brahmacarya conduct, enters the path of the mind” or mind of empty form “of equalized bliss,” meaning unchanging bliss.285
The passage teaches that the jewellike persons or primary disciples of this tantra accomplish vase yoga and then strive in the paths of retention and recollection. After six months, even if they are at the stage of a beginner, those of brahmacarya conduct, meaning those who have not experienced the loss of bodhicitta, will come to the path of the mind of equalized or unchanging bliss that is devoid of desire for the inferior sensation of the coupling of the two organs. This path of the mind is an attainment in which mind and the empty forms are indivisible.
In short this passage is saying that if jewellike disciples who have completed vase yoga strive on the path for six months, they will achieve the branch of meditative concentration.
The continuation of the above passage, from “Next, full and perfect enlightenment by single instances” up to “at the crown all winds are ended. This is the twelfth,”286 teaches how the instances of bliss increase to 21,600 and how these are responsible for “killing” the winds of karma at the six cakras, resulting in the attainment of the twelve levels.
The continuation of the passage, from “Therefore, until the blazing of oḍa”287 until “bliss will increase,”  teaches the development of the four joys in descent and ascent that occurs from the practice of vase yoga up to recollection.
It is clear that the blazing of the caṇḍālī fire melts the bodhicitta and induces the descent, but how is the ascent brought about?
After “bliss will increase” the passage continues:
“By the certainties of the gurus” means that from the previously taught halting of the winds comes an increase as far as the forehead and that “this is no surprise.”
This means that it should come as no surprise that from the prior practice of the prāṇāyāma halting of the winds comes the stable ascent, wherein the bodhicitta increases from the secret place to the forehead.
The reason for this is that the ability to draw up the bodhicitta is dependent upon the winds being “halted” in the central channel. Prāṇāyāma enhancement ritual Verse 119 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter says:
If by withdrawal and so forth, the wishes of the mantra practitioner are not met,
perform nāda meditation by wrathful means, and they will be accomplished by blocking the drop in the vajra jewel within the lotus.288 On this the Great Commentary says:
Now wrathful yoga is taught. During withdrawal and so forth, when forms are seen but instances of the unchanging have not been generated, because the winds have not been bound, at that time meditate on the nāda, which will be explained, and by wrathful means bring the winds to the central channel. The bodhicitta drops in the lotus of wisdom are halted within the vajra jewel and are unmoving. By this is accomplished an instance of the unchanging. This is the wrathful yoga.289
This passage means that by the meditations of withdrawal, nondefinitive signs of smoke and so forth are seen, but the winds have not been bound in the central channel. Therefore an instance of the bliss that arises from the bodhicitta “unchanging,” which means not falling from the opening of the vajra jewel, has not been generated. When this happens, meditate on the nāda as it is explained in verse 196 of the “easy to understand” verses of the Method of Accomplishment chapter, beginning with the words “The śakti.” With this wrathful yoga the winds are brought to the central channel, and when the yogi relies upon an activity mudrā consort, the winds within the yogi’s vajra jewel, which is placed within the lotus of the wisdom consort, are halted by the force of being brought to the central channel. The bodhicitta does not move outside, and an instance of the unchanging or nonfalling bliss is created.
Therefore, once the winds have been moved into the central channel by the power of meditation, the yogi possesses the certainty of being able to hold the bodhicitta from emission by the power of the winds, and it becomes possible to induce the innate bliss through the power of the winds even from the branch of withdrawal.
Therefore the phrase “instance of the unchanging” mentioned in the passage above is used to describe the bliss that arises from the bodhicitta being held at the tip of the jewel and prevented from falling, but it is not the definitive unchanging bliss.
This can be understood from the lines “accomplished by blocking the drop in the vajra jewel” in the above verse.
The enhancement ritual can be dealt with under three headings:
1.When to perform it
2.The actual ritual
3.The creation of bliss from binding the winds When to perform it If the meditations of withdrawal and prāṇāyāma have produced many visible empty forms but there are no signs of the winds having entered the central channel, this enhancement ritual is to be performed because its enactment will bring the winds into the central channel.
Moreover this ritual is specifically designed to bring winds into the central channel, because the tantra teaches that if bliss is not developed due to the winds not being bound in the central channel, wrathful means are employed to bring that about.
Therefore there are two occasions when this ritual is to be performed. One is when the meditations of withdrawal are unable to bring the winds into the central channel. The other is when the meditations of prāṇāyāma, as indicated by the words “and so forth,” are also unable to bring the winds to the central channel. If withdrawal has brought the winds into the central channel, it is impossible for the winds not to be brought into the central channel during prāṇāyāma.
Therefore prāṇāyāma enhancement is necessary when the winds have not entered the central channel during withdrawal.
If this wrathful yoga brings the winds into the central channel,  then isn’t it acceptable to perform it at the very outset of practice?
If the yogas of withdrawal and prāṇāyāma are first performed gently and over a long time but do not produce results, then this ritual is to be performed.
However, if forceful methods are used from the beginning, not only will the yogi not be able to bring the winds to the central channel, but many obstructions will be created. Therefore such a practice is unsuitable at the outset.
Practicing a meditation such as withdrawal over a long time makes the winds very pliant, and even if wrathful methods are employed at that time, no obstruction will be created. The actual ritual This is taught by verse 196 in the “easy to understand” verses of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter:
The śakti from the center of the navel to another place travel a distance of twelve and a distance of “part,”
they are halted at the navel, together with the pure lightninglike, drawn up in the form of a stick.
They travel from cakra to cakra and disappear, moving through the central channel. At the crown opening, by wrathful method,
a needlelike sensation on the outer skin.290
To explain this verse a little: nāda translated means “mere sound,” which changes the phrase291 to “meditate on the sound.” The “sound” is the sound of hūḥ.
The way this hūḥ is meditated on is as follows. Feet are placed in vajra position, arms in vajra-fist position are crossed across the heart, and the head is slightly bent.
“Śakti” here means the life-sustaining wind. “Another place” in the line “From the center of the navel to another place” refers to the nostrils. From here to the outside, the earth-element wind travels a distance of twelve fingerwidths, the water-element wind a distance of thirteen, fire-element wind fourteen, air-element wind fifteen, and the space-element wind travels a distance of “part,”292 or sixteen, fingerwidths. These life-sustaining winds are inhaled violently, not through the mouth but through the nostrils, and descend through the central channel as far as the navel. The innate tone of the winds is visualized as the sound of hūḥ.
At the same time, from either of the two lower orifices, the downwardly expelling wind, similar in color to pure lightning, is drawn up through the pathway of the central channel and is upright “in the form of a stick.” These two winds are “halted at the navel,” meaning held together at the navel. From the navel cakra to the crown cakra, these two winds “disappear” from the left and right channels  and penetrate instead the centers of succeeding cakras, moving through the central channel.
When they reach the opening of the crown cakra by “wrathful method,” meaning moving by the force of the wind, and the skin on the outside of the head feels as if it is being pricked by needles, this is a sign that the winds have been brought into the central channel by these forceful means. That is the ritual for bringing the winds into the central channel.
However, if consciousness transference is to be performed at this point, the tantra continues:
At that time the downward wind, by supreme wrathful method, is urged into the upward path, and if the two winds are blocked, they travel to the supreme city from the crown opening.293
“At that time,” meaning when wrathful methods have produced needlelike sensations, the downward wind is urged into the upper avadhūtī path by “supreme wrathful method,” meaning by the power of even more forceful winds. This blocks the winds from flowing through the left and right channels, and instead they travel to the supreme city of the ḍākinī from the central channel at the crown opening. The creation of bliss from the binding of winds Generally, in most highest yoga tantras, development of clear-light mind and innate bliss is mainly taught in the completion stage.
The Kālacakra Tantra and Three Bodhisattva Commentaries, which teach in accord with Kālacakra thinking, teach methods for the development of empty forms and great innate bliss once the winds have entered the dhūtī.
The development of empty forms is a limb of or method for the development of unchanging bliss. Therefore the Kālacakra Tantra teaches mainly unchanging bliss and, as a method for its attainment, the development of empty forms.
That is the reason for categorizing Kālacakra as mother tantra.
Therefore these empty forms cannot be just any appearance of empty forms but must be those brought about by the winds having entered the dhūtī. So for the empty forms and the innate bliss of a definitive completion stage to occur, the winds must have entered the central channel.
Therefore, if the winds are brought into the central channel by this wrathful method,  the bodhicitta element is held by the power of the wind and does not fall from the opening of the vajra jewel.
From the achievement of that ability on the path of withdrawal until the attainment of the ability to induce the unchanging bliss by reliance upon a mahāmudrā consort, one engages in union with an activity mudrā consort. The drops are held in the vajra jewel, and from the bliss of nonemission comes the development of the bliss of descent and ascent.
The same is true for a wisdom mudrā consort. Valid cognition
The cognition is a valid, nonconceptual, direct mental perception focused on the winds within the central channel. Purification divisions The Great Commentary, on verse 115 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
“Prāṇāyāma is the sword family”294 refers to the aggregate of mental formations.295 “In ten aspects” refers to the ten mandalas left and right combined as one.296 The six phenomena of the mental formation aggregate group are to be purified into a state of nonobscuration.
There are ten divisions — the ten mandala winds on the right and left — which are halted and combined as one in the central channel. Immediate results are taught in verse 118 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter: Purified by prāṇāyāma,
divorced from the paths of sun and moon, the yogi is praised by the bodhisattvas.297 Because the winds move through the central channel divorced from the moon and sun channels on the left and right, the yogi is praised by the bodhisattvas and will receive a prophecy of enlightenment from the buddhas.
By mastering the winds, the yogi gains mastery over the bodhisattvas.
The definitive meaning of this is that “bodhisattvas” refers to the six organs, and these organs have become celestial eyes and so forth and are able to see hidden phenomena.
The Great Commentary says:
“Purified by prāṇāyāma” means that when the yogi is “divorced from the paths of the sun and moon” and is constantly within the central channel, the yogi will be purified by prāṇāyāma and therefore is “praised by the bodhisattvas.”298
For the final results, mental formations, wind element, the nose, touch, the anus, and the discharge of excrement are all purified to a state of nonobscuration and transformed into a group of six consisting of Amoghasiddhi and so on.
This has been an explanation of the branch of prāṇāyāma, as taught by the following vajra words:
Know the spontaneous, profound vajra recitation performed with mantra and wind inseparable in the Rāhu path.
Know how the life and downward winds, by vaselike meditation,
are in the central channel in the form of embrace.299
The Yoga of Retention The branch of retention: Stabilizing or keeping the winds in the dhūtī This is under six main outlines: 1.The meaning of the term retention
2.The time for retention meditation
3.The meditation
4.Valid cognition
5.Purification divisions
6.Results
The meaning of the term retention This branch is called retention because the winds are brought into the drops in the central channel at the center of six or five cakras and held or retained there.
The Vajrapāṇi Commentary says:
Retention means that the winds of the earth, water, fire, and air mandalas enter the navel, the heart, the throat, and the forehead and, without emerging, are held in the drops. This is the branch of retention.300
Filled with Good Qualities also says:
Retention means that the winds of the mandalas of earth, water, fire, and air enter the navel, heart, throat, and forehead and, without emerging, enter the drops. This is the branch of retention.301
These two passages only mention four cakras, so how is it possible to talk of six or five cakras?
The four mentioned in these two passages are for illustration only. That they actually refer to six cakras will be understood from later explanations. The time for retention meditation When the power of prāṇāyāma has gathered the life and downward winds in the central channel at the center of the navel cakra and combined them as one, and vase yoga has been completed; when the external sign of the life-sustaining and downwardly expelling winds combining — the two breaths’ lack of smell — has manifested;
when the inner sign — the fierce caṇḍālī fire — and the secret sign — when one of the winds is bound, the other is bound also — have both arisen, then this is the time to meditate on retention.
If the two winds have not combined in the central channel at the cakras, then the basis for retention, wherein the winds in the cakra centers neither enter nor leave, is not there. The meditation This has five headings:
1.Identifying the path of retention
2.Divisions
3.The way to meditate 4.Experiences gained from meditation 5.Incidental topic:
Attaining the nectar of immortality Identifying the path of retention After the downward and life winds have been combined within the dhūtī at the center of the navel cakra by the power of prāṇāyāma, the winds are prevented from entering or leaving, and these mounts of the mind are stabilized within the drops that are inside the dhūtī at the centers of the six cakras. From this there arises an indivisibility of empty forms and great bliss.
Filled with Good Qualities says:
“Gradually the winds disappear and are within the drops” means that within the bodhicitta drops, the life winds, the mounts of the mind, are one with emptiness.302 Divisions Retention has six branches corresponding to the winds being held in the central channel at the center of the six cakras, for instance the secret cakra. The Great Commentary, on verse 115 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
“Retention is Ratnasambhava” refers to the aggregate of feeling. The retaining of the winds refers to their entering and leaving the lotuses of the navel, the heart, throat, forehead, and crown. In this way it has ten aspects.303 This passage adds the crown cakra to the four mentioned by the Vajrapāṇi Commentary to make five.
These same five are mentioned by Nāropa in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations: Retention at the lotuses of the navel, heart, throat, forehead, and crown.304 Also Sūryaśrī says in his Filled with Good Qualities: “The movements of both are destroyed” means that within the navel, heart, throat, forehead, and crown, there is no movement and no leaving.305 Although the secret cakra is not actually mentioned, the writings of Butön state:
In the center of the five or six wheels of the navel and so forth.306 Also in the same text, in the section on divisions of retention, it says:
The tantra talks of “The six branches of near accomplishment,” which refer to the six vase yogas.307
On this, Notes on Kālacakra says: Although that is not the meaning of the quote from the tantra, it is acceptable to posit six kinds of retention in the six cakras.308 The way to meditate This is under four headings.
The first three, place of meditation, posture, and eye positioning, are the same as in prāṇāyāma. Focus of the meditation Meditation is focused on the “sphere” of wind that is the combination of the life and downward winds.
As it says in the Kālacakrapāda Transmission:
The focus is the wind of bliss.309
The way mind is placed on this object is that with mind and wind rolled together as one, the mind is one-pointedly focused on the combined winds concentrated within the drops in the dhūtī at the centers of the cakras.
The Root Tantra states:
Placing the vajra in the lotus,
the winds enter the drops.310
Also the Later Guhyasamāja says, “Breath, the nature of the five jewels” and so on. The meaning of this quote was explained by the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary in the section on vase yoga and also needs to be understood here, because the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary applies the meaning of these lines from the tantra to both prāṇāyāma and retention.
The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary, after the explanation of these lines from the tantra, says:
Like this, within these locations of the drops, the winds, in globe-shaped form, are halted. That is retention.311
This passage is saying that in the drops of body, speech, mind, and gnosis located inside the dhūtī at the centers of the cakras, the winds are combined in a sphere or globe-shaped form and are halted from flowing through the left and right channels. Combined with these drops, the mind dwells one-pointedly upon the winds, and this is the way to meditate on the branch of retention.
What is the procedure of the meditation? As the notes and writings of the dharma master Butön state, the meditation begins at the center of the navel cakra.312 There the “sphere” that is the combination of the life and downward winds is held by vase yoga as an indivisible entity of drop, mind, and winds inside the central channel at the center of the sixty-four-petal earth-mandala navel cakra.
Expelling the wind outside is done gently and without effort.
Because of this, in the manner of earth dissolving into water, the focus of meditation is then held at the heart, in the same way it was held at the navel. In the manner of water dissolving into fire, the focus moves to the throat. In the manner of fire dissolving into air, it moves to the forehead.
In the manner of air dissolving into space, it moves to the crown, and in the manner of space dissolving into gnosis, the meditation moves to the secret cakra. This can be explained in more detail.
The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says: From blocking the left and right pathways, the winds constantly flow within the central avadhūtī.313 As this quote indicates, the accomplishment of the practice of vajra recitation ensures that the winds enter and leave only from the central channel during the one-pointed meditation on vajra recitation. These winds travel from the navel to the outside when leaving and as far as the navel when entering. Therefore the yogi who has accomplished the practice of vajra recitation has mastered the ability, during the single-pointed session on vajra recitation, to move the winds between the navel and the nostrils314 solely by way of the central channel.
The winds only move up and down through the dhūtī at the centers of the cakras.
Therefore, on the accomplishment of vajra recitation, the channel knots at the cakras must have loosened, because if they had not, the winds would not flow up and down solely through the dhūtī at the centers of the cakras. Therefore, when vajra recitation is mastered and before the commencement  of vase yoga, a little vajra recitation is performed to get the winds to enter the central channel. This is followed by the life and downward winds being drawn from above and below. This is not just imagined or visualized; the winds are actually drawn through the central channel to combine at the navel.
This vase-yoga meditation is continued session after session to eventually produce the outer, inner, and secret signs.
The caṇḍālī fire at the navel blazes up to melt the bodhicitta and create the four joys of descent and stable ascent. After the completion of vase yoga, retention meditation is performed. At this point the upper life wind and the lower downward wind have been drawn from above and below into the central channel and combined as one in the navel cakra. At this point these winds and channels are actually seen. This spherelike amalgamation of life and downward winds is combined with the drop that creates the waking state and that is located in the central channel at the center of the navel cakra.
The mind is single-pointedly placed on this and held there determinedly, with the winds not being allowed to stray up or down. This is practiced repeatedly, and at first the combined winds will not naturally stay in place without effort. However the time will come when the two winds mixed with the drops will remain there naturally without effort. When that occurs, it is meditated upon and eventually stabilized. Then the meditation moves on to the heart cakra, as in the procedure explained above.
By the power of meditation the winds enter the central channel during prāṇāyāma and abide there during retention.
At all times during these meditations, the clear-light mind is directly experienced, and various empty forms appear. In particular, wherever the mind and winds are held, there an empty-form Kālacakra in mother-and-father embrace, indivisible from the clear-light mind, unimputed and unconceived, will appear of its own accord. This is a natural cause-and-effect process.
In the section on vajra recitation it is not taught that the caṇḍālī fire blazes due to the practice of vajra recitation.
However it will blaze on the completion of vase yoga, causing the bodhicitta to melt and to bring about the four joys of descent and ascent. Here, in the section on retention, it is taught that the four joys of descent and ascent are greater than those of vase yoga. At these two times, when the four joys are generated, the clear-light mind becomes a mind of great bliss. This great-bliss mind is placed one-pointedly on the noninherent nature of the empty forms that arise simultaneously with this mind. Within this state the empty forms clearly appear, and they too are single-pointedly focused upon.
Some say that when the upper wind is drawn in, the winds and mind are made indivisible from the empty forms and are then drawn to the location of the drop at the center of the cakras.
However, when the upper wind is drawn inside, empty forms do not appear, so how could they be made indivisible from the winds and mind? Experiences gained from meditation Sūryaśrī Jñāna says:
“Selves, powers, and the jewel all cease;
holding to this is retention.”
To explain this in greater detail, “Selves” refers to the objects of form and so forth.
“Powers” refers to the eyes and so forth. Selves and powers cease and dissolve. Then the jewel, which is the basis for the objects and sense powers and refers to the jewel of the mind, ceases together with prāṇāyāma and disappears. This is to be focused upon. That is retention.315
This means that the situation after the completion of retention is that the “selves,” or objects of form and so forth, and the sense powers of the eyes and so forth have ceased and dissolved.
Then, after this dissolution, “the jewel, which is the basis for the objects and sense powers and refers to the jewel of the mind, ceases together with prāṇāyāma and disappears.” Here prāṇāyāma means “winds.” This means that the clear light arises as a vast emptiness.
The master Butön says that if a definitive clear-light emptiness arises, it is not possible to be without fear, and that one should meditate well armed with instructions.316 Furthermore, when the life and downward winds are combined at the navel, the caṇḍālī fire blazes, and all food or drink taken becomes a fire offering to the caṇḍālī fire. Its nourishment improves the body’s complexion.
All waste in the body is burnt away by the caṇḍālī fire, and excrement and urine are no longer passed.
The body becomes light and of good odor and color.
From this time onward one cannot be harmed by untimely death.
The Kālacakrapāda Transmission says:
No eating, no hunger; even if eating, all is digested. Downward winds do not descend,
but bliss descends. Great powers, great stomach,
nonconceptual bliss in body, speech, and so on.317 At first this meditation can only be maintained with effort, and under its own power it will not last.
However with prolonged meditation there comes a point from which the downward and life winds combined in the dhūtī remain there of their own accord.
From that time onward they can remain for a day, half a month, a month, six months, a year, and even beyond a year.
In these periods the bodhicitta can be held immobile at the forehead, throat, heart, navel, secret area, and jewel tip.
This is explained in Notes on Kālacakra.
Incidental topic:
Attaining the nectar of immortality
Verse 193 of the “easy to understand” verses of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter says: Locked in vajra position, teeth not touching, mouth open,
gather in outside air, together with nectar, bringing them to the center of the navel.
All torments, hunger, and thirst will be destroyed, and in the supreme body all poison also disappears. Surrounded by the vowels of the forehead white drop, this practice is accomplished by emanating nectar.318 The body is locked in the vajra position.
The upper and lower teeth do not touch each other. The mouth is slightly open. Air is gathered from outside and is brought to the center of the navel cakra together with nectar gathered from the uvula.319 This will destroy all torments of fever, hunger, and thirst.
Together with an attainment such as the branch of retention, all poison and untimely death, which is indicated by the word “also,” will disappear from the body of the supreme yogi. This is the supreme nourishment.
What is the uvula nectar?
In the center of the sixteen-petal forehead cakra on a moon mandala is the white drop completely encircled by vowels from which nectar descends. The tongue is turned upward touching the uvula, and one meditates on the nectar falling from the uvula.
With practice the mouth becomes filled with saliva, which increases in sweetness until finally it develops the supreme nectarlike taste and becomes the supreme nourishment. It is taught that if this is performed too often during one session, the nectar falling from the uvula can cause illness.
Therefore this should be performed gradually. Valid cognition This is taught as being a direct and mental valid cognition. Purification divisions The six phenomena of the feeling aggregate group are the phenomena to be purified.
At each of the five cakras the winds are divided into those that enter and those that leave. Therefore there are ten aspects.
The Great Commentary, on verse 115 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
“Again ten aspects: retention is Ratnasambhava” refers to the aggregate of feeling. The retaining of the winds refers to their entering and leaving the lotuses of the navel, heart, throat, forehead, and crown. In this way it has ten aspects.320
The maras and afflictions that are equated with the movement of the winds in the right and left channels have been weakened, and therefore untimely death is no longer a threat. Winds no longer enter or leave, and so the mind engages the “ten powers,” or empty forms. These are the immediate results.
The Great Commentary on verse 118 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter says:
“Maras, afflictions, and so forth weaken, and the ten powers are engaged” refers to the mind apprehending the empty forms. “This is by the power of retention“ means by the power of the winds no longer coming and going and being combined as one.321
The final results are that the feeling aggregate, the fire element, the eye sense power, the element of taste, the hands, and the activity of going all become free from obscuration, and take the form of Ratnasambhava and so forth.
This has been an extensive explanation of the branch of retention as taught by these vajra words:
Know how winds enter the drops by retention
and emanations depart and withdraw into the pure body.322 The Yoga of Recollection Branch of recollection: The actual creator of unchanging bliss This is under six main headings:
1.Meaning of the term 2.Time of the meditation
3.The meditation
4.Valid cognition
5.Purification divisions 6.Results Meaning of the term Oneself as the empty-form father-and-mother Kālacakra that originally arose from the accomplishments and stabilizations developed by the practices of withdrawal and meditative absorption is now to be recollected or recalled as an actual phenomenon.
The three-world empty forms, like forms in a clairvoyant’s mirror, that were emanated by this father-and-mother Kālacakra in space are also recollected — hence the term recollection.
The Later Guhyasamāja says:
That meditated upon is recalled
and its forms perfectly emanate;
know this as recollection.
Illumination is created there.323 The meaning of this verse is explained by Nāropa in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations:
“That meditated upon” refers to that stabilized by the branches of withdrawal and meditative absorption. By nature it illuminates the three worlds, and it is a conventional truth.
That is to be recalled and by doing so, “its forms perfectly emanate.” “Its forms” refers to conventional forms, while “perfectly emanate” means seeing them as pervading all realms of space.
“Know this as recollection” means that seeing the three worlds of the three times should be understood as the branch of recollection.
Because of that it was taught.
“Illumination is created there” means the illumination of the three realms is created “there” in the branch of recollection.324
To explain this passage a little, “That meditated upon” refers to an empty-form real325 mother-and-father Kālacakra in embrace arising from the primary accomplishments and stabilizations of the branches of withdrawal and meditative absorption. It radiates light capable of illuminating the three worlds, and itself is a conventional truth. This is to be recalled or recollected, and therefore this branch is known as recollection. “Its forms perfectly emanate” refers to being in the form of a conventional-truth empty-form Kālacakra in mother-and-father embrace that emanates and pervades the realms of space, and that this too should be regarded as recollection.
This is to be focused on or recollected.
“Know this as recollection” means that, furthermore, seeing the three-world empty forms of past, present, and future, which were stabilized previously by withdrawal and meditative absorption, should also be known as the branch of recollection.
Because of these reasons it was taught.
“Illumination is created there” means that the well-illumined empty forms of the three worlds are actual phenomena and not just appearances in the mind, and that they are created “there” in the branch of recollection. Therefore the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary talks of signs arising when first meditating on empty forms and of signs arising at the time of accomplishment. Concerning the latter:
Here is actual smoke and fire, capable of performing the function of burning.
It is the same with the rain of saffron, flowers, jewels, or gold.326 The “time of accomplishment” referred to by this passage begins from the attainment of recollection, and this can be known from the Guhyasamāja Root Tantra, as quoted above, and its commentary.
Furthermore “accomplishment” must refer to actual creation as opposed to mere appearances in the mind. Otherwise it would follow that there would be no difference between the empty forms of the branches of withdrawal and meditative absorption and the empty forms of the branch of recollection. Time of the meditation The time for meditation is when retention has been completed and the bodhicitta can be held and kept at each of the cakras without being allowed to fall. When this attainment is reached, one enters the recollection meditation.
The meditation
This is under four headings: 1.Definition 2.Divisions
3.Actual meditation 4.How to make use of the two mudrā consorts Definition
The branch of retention is completed, and one enters union with one of the two types of consorts. This ignites the caṇḍālī fire, whose appearance manifests as empty forms in the space of the three realms. In particular, the yogi single-pointedly recollects the empty-form Kālacakra in father-and-mother embrace, now as an actual phenomenon and located within the dhūtī at the center of the navel cakra. The blazing caṇḍālī fire dissolves the element and produces the four joys of descent. The clear-light mind in the nature of these joys is divorced from all conception and is one-pointedly immersed in this special empty form as well as in its emptiness of any inherent existence.
The Great Commentary, on verse 117 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
The appearances of the caṇḍālī fire are in the space of the three worlds. This is recollection.327 This quote is saying that empty-form appearances of the blazing caṇḍālī fire manifest in “the space of the three worlds,” or realms, and that these empty forms are to be recollected, hence the term recollection.
The text here merely says “in the space” and is not that specific. However the Great Commentary says on verse 119:
“Recollection is excellently pure.” Recollection, as spoken of here, refers to a mind embracing the forms and divorced from all conception.328 This is saying that the nature of recollection is a clear-light mind “embracing” or inseparable from empty forms, divorced from all conception.
This quote is clearly referring to empty forms “in the space.” How are these forms described? The Great Commentary continues:
Therefore, when they become pure, at that time there are “mandalas of pure light.” The word “also” refers to the five rays of light radiating and traveling through the pores.
“From the gnosis form” means from the empty forms.329 To explain this passage a little:
The nature of recollection is a clear-light mind divorced from all conception that embraces or is indivisible from an actual empty-form mother-and-father Kālacakra. Therefore, when the branch of retention is completed, the empty forms, which at that time are mere appearances to the yogi’s mind, are purified and are endowed with “mandalas of pure light” to become actual and definitive empty forms. The word “also”330 refers to a special empty-form deity that is within this coarse body331 and from which the five light rays shine. These rays radiate and travel out through the pores of the coarse body.
From where do these light rays radiate?
“From the gnosis form,” meaning from that empty form. All this is clearly taught in the above passage.
Similarly the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says:
In recollection the desired deity is seen in the form of an image, free from conception.
From it many rays of light radiate in the form of mandalas of light.
From this image many forms emanate in the nature of the three realms. This is spoken of as the branch of recollection.332 The meaning of this passage should be understood in the way the previous passage was explained. What is the caṇḍālī fire mentioned in the line “The appearances of the caṇḍālī fire ”?
This refers to the caṇḍālī fire, seen and experienced by the yogi, that blazes in the dhūtī at the navel, brought on by the power of the completion of the branch of retention.
“The appearances of the caṇḍālī fire are in the space of the three worlds” means that the blazing caṇḍālī fire produces the special empty form of an actual Kālacakra in mother-and-father union endowed with mandalas of light. These light mandalas emanate countless mahāmudrā buddha light rays of empty forms, like images in a clairvoyant’s mirror. “The appearances of the caṇḍālī fire” refer to this and to the various empty forms emanated by that special empty form.
Furthermore, concerning the line “Achieving the image of the deity,”333 the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says:
Concerning “Achieving the image of the deity,” the power of retention causes the yogi to see, divorced from all conception, the caṇḍālī fire blazing at the navel. Like forms in a clairvoyant’s mirror, countless mahāmudrā buddha light-ray clouds are emanated by the mandalas of light. This is said to be the practice of the branch of  recollection, a meditation on caṇḍālī fire upon the completion of retention.334 Divisions There are three divisions. Those of sharp intelligence enter union with as many mahāmudrā consorts as there are atoms in Mount Meru. Those of a middling intelligence enter union with as many wisdom mudrā consorts as there are goddesses in the mandala. Those of low intelligence enter union with an activity mudrā consort.
Actual meditation This is under two main headings:
1.The meditation common to all three types of persons
2.The meditations of each type The meditation common to all three types of persons Up to the completion of retention, empty forms such as the father-and-mother Kālacakra exist only as appearances to the mind and not as actual phenomena. Therefore recollection represents the accomplishment of actual empty forms.
By igniting the special caṇḍālī fire at the navel, great bliss is generated. This mind of great bliss focuses on and meditates upon the empty-form Kālacakra in mother-and-father embrace that has appeared in the dhūtī at the navel. By the power of this meditation, the appearance of this Kālacakra mother and father becomes purer and purer and transforms into an actual empty-form Kālacakra mother and father.
The five light rays emerge from this deity form, pass through the pores of this coarse body, and radiate outside.
Also countless actual deity forms emerge from this inner deity form in identical aspect and pervade the reaches of space. The great bliss arising from the the special caṇḍālī fire at the navel is produced in three ways: by focusing the mind single-pointedly on the caṇḍālī fire blazing at the completion of retention, by reliance on an activity mudrā consort, and by reliance on a wisdom mudrā consort.
The three types of person develop the great bliss by relying on these three methods.
The assertion that the three types of person will develop the great bliss by relying on an activity mudrā consort, is taught in the “easy to understand” seventy-third verse of the Gnosis chapter:
To increase this innate bliss of the conqueror, first rely upon an activity mudrā consort;
then create the sun form, with body, face, legs, crown, all limbs complete;
in a flash of lightning resemblance, arises a definitive creator of unmoving bliss, all features complete.335
The meaning of this is as follows. In the first five branches, from the attainment of the ability to hold the bodhicitta element and prevent it from falling by the power of the winds up to the ability to generate the supreme and unchanging bliss, one first relies upon an activity mudrā consort in order to increase the innate bliss.
After that, in recollection, a deity form is created endowed with the rays of the sun, with body, face, legs, crown, and so forth, all completed and in the aspect of Kālacakra in mother-and-father embrace. The consort of this union is the definitive mahāmudrā consort, the creator of the unmoving drop and unchanging bliss, created in the great bliss of the blazing caṇḍālī fire resembling a “flash of lightning.” She is an actually created consort with “all features complete.” The reason why all three types of person — sharp, middling, and dull — must rely upon the activity mudrā consort in the first five branches is as follows.
In those five branches one practices on the path in order to prevent bodhicitta emission, to develop a nonchanging bliss336 and to attain similitude and definitive empty forms.
For these attainments one relies, with skillful means, on an activity mudrā consort, and having habituated to nonemission,  one must develop nonfalling bodhicitta and nonchanging bliss as well as empty forms, which are the objective aspects of that bliss.
The Great Commentary, in the Supreme and Unchanging Gnosis summary, says:
By mudrā consort yoga, instinctual emission is transformed into instinctual nonemission, like mercury and fire. This is spoken of by the Buddha in verse 224 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter of the king of tantras:337
“Fire is enemy of quicksilver; without fire quicksilver is never bound.
Unbound it will not create gold; no gold is of no use to man.
Similarly, not in union with a consort, the yogi’s mind is forever unbound.
Unbound, his body is not penetrated, a body not penetrated does not grant innate bliss.”338 Therefore the meditation common to all three types of persons is under five headings:
1.Place of meditation
2.Meditation posture
3.Position of the eyes
4.Actual meditation 5.Signs of accomplishment Place of meditation
The “easy to understand” seventy-fourth verse of the Gnosis chapter says:
With these four mudrā consorts giving fruits of unchanging bliss, in towns, in isolation, in cemeteries, in unclean and clean places,
in houses, and in temples, at all times in the joy of joys,
free from worldly paths, engaging in the accepted and unaccepted,
with food and drink giving bodily strength and well-being, the yogi should meditate.339 The yogi meditates in these places in extreme isolation. Meditation posture It is taught that the posture used in withdrawal and meditative absorption when inducing bliss by inner focus is an acceptable posture here. Position of the eyes The eyes are single-pointedly focused on the empty-form Kālacakra mother and father that has arisen in the central channel at the center of the navel cakra.
The Guhyasamāja Tantra says:
The yogi, striving in accomplishment,
meditates on the form of the deity,340 These lines teach that at the time of the practice of recollection, which is the branch of accomplishment from among the four branches of approximation and accomplishment, the yogi looks at and meditates upon the form of the deity.
Although in the actual meditation it is the clear-light mind in the nature of great bliss that looks and meditates, I think the eyes also should be positioned as if they were looking inside the central channel at the navel cakra. Actual meditation
After the completion of retention, the three kinds of practitioners will ignite the navel caṇḍālī fire by relying on either outer or inner causes. This causes the bodhicitta to melt and to induce the great bliss of descent and stable ascent. The clear-light mind develops into that bliss, focusing and meditating single-pointedly on the empty-form Kālacakra in mother-and-father aspect that has arisen in the central channel at the center of the navel cakra. At this time the empty form in this meditation is only an appearance and not an actuality. However, with prolonged meditation, that appearance is transformed in an actual empty-form Kālacakra mother-and-father deity.
This moment represents the attainment of the actual path of recollection. Signs of accomplishment After the completion of retention, the outer cause of the two mudrā consorts and the inner cause of focusing and meditating single-pointedly on the combined life and downward winds as indivisible from the drop within the dhūtī at the navel cakra will produce signs that are mere appearances but in a more distinct form than previous signs. These range from those of smoke up to the empty-form Kālacakra mother and father. At those times the caṇḍālī fire at the navel blazes and the bodhicitta melts to induce the four joys of descent and stable ascent. These are the ordinary signs.
The clear-light mind of that period in the nature of bliss focuses and meditates single-pointedly upon the appearance that is the empty-form Kālacakra mother and father. This causes the empty-form deity appearance to transform into an actual form of a Kālacakra mother-and-father deity, encircled by mandalas of stainless light. From this form  light rays of five colors emerge and emanate through the pores of the coarse physical body. Countless more forms in identical deity aspect emanate as actual phenomena and pervade the reaches of space.
The bliss of descent and stable ascent is developed from reliance upon the three kinds of mudrā consorts and experienced from the time of the development of the actual- phenomena empty forms up to the attainment of unchanging bliss. This is the actual path of recollection and the primary signs of accomplishment. The references for this are the passages from the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary and so on, which were explained previously.
How is the bliss of descent and stable ascent described?
It arises from the creation of and desire for an actual mahāmudrā consort or, if a mahāmudrā consort has not been developed, from reliance upon an activity or wisdom mudrā consort.
The special caṇḍālī fire at the navel melts the bodhicitta at the crown, which descends to the forehead, and joy is experienced.
Descending to the throat and to the heart, one experiences supreme joy. Falling from the heart to the secret place, one experiences special joy.
Arriving at the tip of the jewel, one experiences innate joy.
A Short Teaching on Initiations says:
From the crown, the lotus of the head,
fluid comes and there is joy;
at throat and heart supreme joy.
Then comes joy that is special joy,
then various joys at the navel
and at the secret lotus.
From secret place to vajra jewel
comes innate joy and the unmoving.341 The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says:
Light rays of this gnosis burn the aggregates, spheres, sources, and so forth. They travel to the left and right channels, where they combine with the five aggregates of consciousness and so forth and the five mandalas of earth and so forth, and come to reside in the moon mandala at the forehead. Then gnosis light rays melt the moon, and the bodhicitta moves down in the form of a drop.
In the lotuses of the throat, heart, navel, and secret place is joy, supreme joy, and joyless joy,  and at the tip of the vajra jewel is innate joy.
Also they are of the nature of variety, ripening, rubbing, and being without characteristics.342
To explain this passage a little, gnosis light rays arise from focusing and meditating on the caṇḍālī fire itself or from the caṇḍālī fire that arises from reliance on one of the three mudrā consorts.
These rays proceed to “burn the aggregates, spheres, sources, and so forth,” meaning that these phenomena are scorched by the heat of the caṇḍālī fire. From these aggregates, spheres, and sources arises bodhicitta, which travels to the right and left channels. There it combines with the bodhicitta that is of the nature of the five aggregates of consciousness and so forth and of the nature of the mandalas of the five elements of earth and so forth, and comes to reside in the moon mandala, or bodhicitta, at the center of the forehead cakra.
Again the caṇḍālī fire blazes, and its gnosis light rays melt the moon, or bodhicitta, at the forehead.
The bodhicitta, in the form of a drop, moves down from the forehead to the throat to produce joy.
Moving from the throat to the heart, it produces the supreme joy and from the heart to the navel, joyless joy.
Moving from the navel to the secret place and from there to the tip of the vajra jewel, it produces innate joy.
Furthermore these four joys “are of the nature of variety, ripening, rubbing, and being without characteristics.” After this line the text continues:
In this way the sixteen parts are complete. At the tip of the jewel, meditation produces bliss. Such joy of nonemission is only an example.
Its nature is bliss born from the two organs and therefore does not come to within even a ten-billionth part of the supreme unchanging bliss.
Here, during the time of nonchanging bliss, the innate bliss is that of a child, and yogis should know it as an immediate result.343 The meaning of this passage is as follows.
The four joys are each divided into four to make sixteen, and “in this way the sixteen parts are complete.” The bodhicitta reaches the tip of the vajra jewel, where it remains, and “meditation produces bliss.” This is the nonchanging bliss of descent arising from the bodhicitta not falling from the opening of the vajra jewel and is produced in reliance upon an activity mudrā consort.
Such bliss is only an example presented to illustrate the definitive unchanging bliss. By itself it could not illustrate even a fraction of unchanging bliss, because the “bliss born from the two organs does not come to within even a ten-billionth part of unchanging bliss.” “Here” in the context of explaining Cakrasaṃvara in accord with the Kālacakra, “during the time of nonchanging bliss,” compared to unchanging bliss, the nature of this innate joy of the four joys is that of a child, and yogis should know it as an immediate result of recollection.
The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary, from “Light rays of this gnosis” up to “and yogis should know it as an immediate result,” explains the formation of the deity form of recollection and the four joys in the context of meditation methods for developing the branch of meditative concentration, before which the unchanging bliss is not truly developed. Nevertheless all developments of four joys are illustrated by this description because they share similar characteristics. Therefore, whenever bliss is created by targeting the winds and channels of the body or by relying on the two mudrā consorts, the drops that are located in all parts of the body are first gathered at the forehead or crown and then brought down to the channel of the vajra jewel. The meditations of each type of person
Recollection meditation for those of high intelligence is under two headings: 1.Meditation for attaining the recollection deity form
2.Meditation after attaining the recollection deity form
Meditation for attaining the recollection deity form The meditation place, meditation posture, and position of eyes are as explained in the above section on the common meditation.
After the accomplishment of the branch of retention, the life and downward winds are combined at the navel, and so mental placement is primarily a single-pointed focus on the empty-form Kālacakra mother-and-father as just an appearance illumined by the light of the caṇḍālī fire in the center of the navel cakra. Constant meditation on this form, together with enhancement by relying on the two types of mudrā consorts, will ignite the special caṇḍālī fire and generate innate bliss. Clear-light mind is developed into the nature of this bliss and placed one-pointedly into the empty-form Kālacakra mother-and-father deity that vividly appears before it. This is meditated on again and again, and as much as that is undertaken, the appearance of that deity form becomes progressively purer, finally developing into an actual empty form in the aspect of Kālacakra mother and father. This is the recollection body. From that form countless bodies emanate to fill the three realms. These are also actual recollection bodies. Meditation after attaining the recollection deity form
The empty-form Kālacakras in the aspect of mother-and-father embrace, both that dwelling in the center of the navel cakra and those pervading the three realms, have become actual phenomena and definitive recollection forms. All these outer and inner Kālacakra mother-and-father forms are of the same mental continuum as the yogi and, therefore, by way of attraction to the consort in the form of Viśvamātā, these Kālacakra forms enter into union. Meditative equipoise is held single-pointedly on this union, and after repeated meditation, the yogi arrives at a point when the bodhicitta elements located within parts of the gross body gather at the forehead cakra and gradually travel to the vajra jewel, from which arises the sixteen joys. As the white element arrives at the tip of the jewel, the red element arrives at the crown. These two do not move elsewhere and are firmly located in their respective places.
From these drops an instance of the stable supreme and unchanging bliss arises. This is an indication of the actual attainment of the branch of meditative concentration. Therefore the path from the first of the four or sixteen joys onward is established as being the path of recollection. It may be thought that the yogi of high intelligence, after the attainment of the recollection body, only needs to rely upon the mahāmudrā consort and has no need of the other two types of consort. On this point some say that after completing the branch of retention, the intelligent yogi has the ability to actually raise the recollection body from within the equipoise of the meditative concentration of retention without break or interruption to the session, and to induce the unchanging bliss at that time by entering in union with the empty-form Viśvamātā.
Therefore they assert that recollection can be completed within the one continuous meditation session of the meditative concentration of retention, and that the unchanging bliss of the branch of meditative concentration can also be attained in that session.
They also maintain that the yogi of high intelligence, while developing the recollection form, and even after it has been developed, does not rely upon activity and wisdom mudrā consorts. This is not correct.
After the completion of retention it is necessary to train in caṇḍālī fire practice, to rely on activity and wisdom consorts, and to undertake many other practices in order to attain the recollection body.
Therefore how would it be possible to complete recollection and attain meditative concentration in one continuous session of retention meditation?
The yogi of high intelligence, when developing recollection, relies upon an activity mudrā consort as previously quoted in the Condensed Tantra:
To increase this innate bliss of the conqueror, first rely upon an activity mudrā consort.
Therefore, after the completion of retention and during the development of recollection, an activity mudrā consort is used. This causes the caṇḍālī fire to ignite, which melts the bodhicitta to produce great bliss, which is then single-pointedly placed on the similitude empty form. With repeated meditation a definitive and actual empty-form Kālacakra mother-and-father form is achieved.
At that time a mahāmudrā consort, the creator of the bliss of the unmoving element, is created as an actual phenomenon. This is taught by the following lines, which have been explained previously:
Then create the sun form, with body, face, legs, crown, all limbs complete;
in a flash of lightning resemblance, arises a definitive creator of unmoving bliss, all features complete.344 Furthermore the yogi of high intelligence relies upon the activity mudrā consort even after the attainment of the recollection form. The Great Commentary, on verse 121 of the Gnosis chapter, states:
“Mind in closeness to the mudrā” means that from desire for the form, the bodhicitta melts, the yogi abides in supreme bliss, and the vajra is raised. This is the third, the face of the mind.
If joy is not realized through the use of form, at that time “use the sound of the vajra in the lotus,” which means to move it slowly.
If a girl is not found, then penetrate the lotus of the hand.
This is to done to increase bliss and not to create a downfall.345 Therefore, after the development of an actual recollection empty form, the yogi desires the empty-form Viśvamātā. From this “the bodhicitta melts, the yogi abides in supreme bliss,” and because of the desire, “the vajra is raised.” This represents the third of the four vajras, which is Kālacakra’s “face of the mind,” or the mind vajra of recollection. If at this time the yogi has great desire for this empty form but joy is not generated through reliance on this empty form, “use the sound of the vajra in the lotus” of an activity mudrā consort, which means to generate the bliss by moving the vajra slowly in the lotus of an activity mudrā.
If it is thought that this passage is not about the attainment of the definitive recollection body, then it should be known that this passage is in the section that comments on recollection as well as on the attainment of meditative concentration following the achievement of recollection, for the passage continues:
This bliss of not expelling the seed destroys the fear of death and is the fourth face of the guru, or the gnosis vajra. This is a confirmation of the yoga meditations.
This passage talks of the gnosis vajra and, of the four vajras, the branch of meditative concentration has been taught as the gnosis vajra.
It could be thought that this may indeed be a passage on the attainment and postattainment of recollection but that it is a teaching on the need for the yogi of low intelligence to rely upon an activity mudrā consort.
That would not be correct, because this is not a section in which the tantra and the commentary are teaching for any particular type of person but a section that explains the central tenets of the path.
The central tenets of the path are taught for the primary intended disciples of the tantra, and the primary intended disciples of the tantra are those of high intelligence. Furthermore the Great Commentary, on verse 120 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
Concerning the line beginning “Moved toward the wisdom, the moon drop,” the movement refers to that of the moon drop, whose movement is generated by desire for the wisdom. The moon drop is the bodhicitta drop, which moves to the wisdom but remains in the vajra. Of that, the three nonchanging at the secret area, the navel, and the heart represent accomplishment.
This is the third branch known as accomplishment. Practice accomplishment in this way.346 Therefore, in this section on the branch of completion-stage accomplishment, the bodhicitta, which moves toward the activity mudrā consort, stays in the vajra, thereby inducing the bliss of stable ascent that is the three nonchanging or nondescending states at the secret area, navel, and heart.
Moreover, among the four branches of approximation and accomplishment, the branch of accomplishment is established as being recollection.
These tantra and commentary passages also explain the central tenets of the path. Furthermore the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary, on the lines “With the mind placed inside, meditate upon the siddhi of desire,” says:
The bodhicitta dwelling in the vajra jewel is spoken of as the “mind placed inside.” With the mind placed inside, this nonemitting bodhicitta associates with an activity mudrā or wisdom mudrā, and the characteristics of the three-realm world are meditated on as forms of the Buddha. The three-realm world refers to the animate and inanimate characteristics of the desire, form, and formless realms,  and to functional and nonfunctional phenomena, all of which are possessed of supreme characteristics.
They are wisdom gone beyond, possessed of supreme characteristics. On all these the yogi meditates.347 Therefore, when one has the ability to hold the bodhicitta within the vajra jewel without emission, one associates with activity or wisdom mudrā consorts and induces the great bliss. Because of this great bliss the characteristics of the three-realm world appear as the forms of all buddhas in empty form. These are single-pointedly focused upon.
A more detailed explanation of the “three-realm world” follows from the sentence beginning “The three-realm world refers to” up to the sentence “On all these the yogi meditates.” The bliss induced by reliance upon activity and wisdom mudrā consorts is single-pointedly focused on empty forms.
These empty forms are “wisdoms gone beyond” and are actual empty forms “possessed of supreme characteristics.” This is the meaning of the above passage, and therefore it can be established that all three kinds of yogis, of sharp, middling, and dull intelligence, when on the first five branches, and especially on the branch of recollection, have to generate bliss by relying upon activity and wisdom mudrā consorts.
Furthermore the commentary on the line “meditate upon the siddhi of desire” runs:
Here “desire” is great desire, is Vajrasattva, of great significance, supreme and unchanging.348
Therefore “desire” is explained as being the supreme and unchanging bliss.
The passage continues:
“Siddhi” is the mahāmudrā, the wisdom gone beyond, possessed of supreme characteristics.349 “Siddhi” is explained as meaning empty form. This empty form is said to be of two kinds.
The commentary continues: The meditation is of two kinds: earlier meditation on images and later meditation on images.
The earlier meditation is the complete meditation on the signs of smoke and so forth.350 Therefore the earlier meditation refers to those during withdrawal and meditative absorption on images ranging from those of smoke and so forth up to the manifold saṃbhogakāya images.
The commentary continues:
Concerning the later meditation, when the image is seen, the liṅgam is placed in the bhaga,  and meditation is performed in order to increase the supreme and unchanging bliss.351
The later meditation is asserted as being a recollection meditation, and when the image of an actual entity empty-form Kālacakra mother and father of the branch of recollection is seen, the liṅgam of the yogi is placed in the bhaga of an activity mudrā consort, and the yogi meditates upon great bliss.
The purpose of this meditation is to develop and increase the supreme and unchanging bliss of the branch of meditative concentration.
The commentary continues:
Again, to increase the great bliss, the activity mudrā consort and the wisdom mudrā consort are abandoned for meditation on a mahāmudrā consort.
Here the abandoning of the activity mudrā consort and the wisdom mudrā consort was spoken of by the Conqueror in the twelve-thousand-verse Supreme Original Buddha:
“Activity mudrā is left behind,
wisdom mudrā is abandoned; with supreme unchanging yoga
meditate upon the mahāmudrā.”352 By relying on activity and wisdom mudrā consorts, the yogi meditates on great bliss. “Again, to increase the great bliss,” or unchanging bliss, during the branch of meditative concentration, “the activity mudrā consort and the wisdom mudrā consort are abandoned for meditation on a mahāmudrā consort.” This means inducing the unchanging bliss by meditating on desire for the mahāmudrā consort.
The authority for the assertion that in the meditations of the path of meditative concentration, which has the ability to develop the actual unchanging bliss, all meditations on activity and wisdom mudrās are abandoned is stated in the lines beginning “was spoken of by the Conqueror” up to “meditate upon the mahāmudrā.”
Therefore, with the only difference between them being their consort of primary reliance, yogis of sharp, middling, and low intelligence will rely upon activity and wisdom mudrā consorts, generating the four joys of descent and stable ascent and applying that bliss to emptiness until they are able to induce great unchanging bliss through the mahāmudrā consort. They develop the recollection body, which is an actual entity of an empty-form Kālacakra mother and father, and during the four joys, the mind of clear light develops into the entity of the bliss and takes on the aspect of desire for union between oneself as Kālacakra and his consort.
Meditating in this way will eventually create the ability to generate great unchanging bliss through reliance on the empty-form mahāmudrā Viśvamātā.
Therefore one must know when to rely on and when to abandon the activity and wisdom mudras, as taught in the tantra and commentaries. Recollection meditation for yogis of middling and low intelligence The meditations for developing the recollection body and the meditations following its development are basically the same as those of the yogi of high intelligence.
The difference is that the yogi of middling intelligence relies mainly on the wisdom mudrā consort for inducing the bliss of descent and stable ascent that arises from igniting the caṇḍālī fire, whereas the yogi of low intelligence relies mainly on the activity mudrā consort.
All three types of yogis, when meditating for the achievement of the recollection body upon the completion of retention, will rely upon their own primary methods for creating great bliss, which will generate the great bliss of descent and stable ascent. The clear-light mind develops into the entity of great bliss, focusing and meditating single-pointedly again and again on the empty-form Kālacakra mother and father in whose aspect the yogi has appeared, unimputed and unconceived in the dhūtī at the navel cakra. Finally that similitude empty form in its aspect of Kālacakra in mother-and-father embrace becomes an actual empty-form Kālacakra in mother-and-father embrace.
In some instruction texts it is written that the caṇḍālī fire blazes, induces bliss, and from within the state of bliss and emptiness, one meditates to impel353 the arising of the recollection body.354 This seems to be applying here to the process found in the Guhyasamāja and other tantras, wherein one impels the arising of an illusory body from within either the state of bliss and emptiness or the state of clear light.
However these two are not similar.
The explanation from the Guhyasamāja and other tantras is that within bliss and emptiness, or within the clear-light mind applied to emptiness, the illusory body develops from the subtle wind that acts as a mount for the clear-light mind. However the empty-form body taught here is an empty form whose appearance first arose during withdrawal and meditative absorption, was then prepared by the paths of prāṇāyāma, retention, and so on, and whose attainment is accomplished by the gradual purification process of that empty-form body.
In the explanations on the divisions of recollection, the explanation that those of sharp intelligence enter into union with as many mahāmudrā consorts as there are atoms in Mount Meru, that those of a middling intelligence enter into union with as many wisdom mudrā consorts as there are goddesses in the mandala, and that those of low intelligence enter into union with activity mudras, are ways of practicing the path of recollection after the recollection body has been attained.
On the topic of union with a mahāmudrā consort, one instruction manual that claims to follow Butön Rinpoché and Jé Rinpoché divides recollection up into three divisions and then says:355
Then the empty forms that pervade space transform into the ten śaktis and so forth. Also mahāmudrā consorts as many as there are atoms in Mount Meru transform, enter into union, and create unchanging bliss as before.
This is all that is written on the subject, and Butön Rinpoché himself does not elucidate on union with a mahāmudrā consort. So this should be examined a little.
How is union with a mahāmudrā consort achieved?
Does the yogi achieve it with his gross body, or does he enter into union as the father of the empty-form father-and-mother aspect?
It cannot be the former because the mother in the aspect of empty-form Viśvamātā is in the form of an unobscured and unobstructed rainbow body, and entering into such a union with one’s coarse body would not be possible.
Therefore the latter is correct. The yogi in the form of Kālacakra mother and father has emanated to pervade the three realms. The mother mahāmudrā consorts of that union numbering as many as the number of atoms in Mount Meru and the yogi in the aspect of the Kālacakra father of that union also numbering as many forms as there are atoms in Mount Meru, enter into union. This is the meaning of the assertion that those of sharp intelligence enter into union with as many mahāmudrā consorts as there are atoms in Mount Meru.
The way that the bliss of the melting elements is generated from this union is that the yogi focuses upon himself as empty-form Kālacakra mothers and fathers in union, and by dwelling single-pointedly in this desire, the four or sixteen descending joys are generated from the crown of the gross body down to the forehead, then to the throat and so on, and finally to the tip of the vajra jewel. Therefore, during recollection, the yogi of high intelligence practices repeatedly the method for developing bliss by reliance upon the mahāmudrā consort and enhances the practice by relying on the other two types of mudrā consorts.
The Great Commentary, in the section explaining that the mind vajra refers to recollection and the gnosis vajra refers to meditative concentration, says: Desiring the form, the bodhicitta melts, he abides in supreme bliss, and the vajra is raised.356 Therefore, in the practice of mind-vajra recollection, the primary intended disciples of this tantra desire the form of the mahāmudrā consort, and the vajra of the yogi is raised.
This brings about the melting of the bodhicitta, and the yogi dwells in the bliss that arises from the melting.
If such a disciple does not generate the four joys of the melted bodhicitta by desiring the form of the mahāmudrā consort, “use the sound of the vajra in the lotus” of an activity mudrā consort, which means generating bliss by moving the vajra slowly in the lotus of an activity mudrā.
These and other lines, which have already been explained, clarify this point.
Also the primary intended disciples of this tantra are yogis of high intelligence.
Those of middling and low intelligence rely mainly on wisdom and activity mudrā consorts, respectively, from which they develop the four joys of descent and stable ascent and apply the bliss to emptiness. The yogi arises as the empty-form mother and father and meditates repeatedly on the desire for the mahāmudrā mother. Whether they have achieved the recollection body or not, the three kinds of practitioners at all levels of recollection practice rely on the caṇḍālī fire as well as on wisdom and activity mudrā consorts to induce great bliss, which is then applied to emptiness.
The meditations on that bliss-and-emptiness gnosis ripen the mindstream and are similar-type causes for the development of the 21,600 instances of meditative concentration unchanging bliss. Moreover the empty-form mahāmudrā consort is a special cause of an unchanging bliss not found in the hidden tantra traditions. Therefore great significance should be attached to the achievement of empty form. Relying on the two mudrā consorts This has three headings:
1.Wisdom mudrā consort 2.Activity mudrā consort 3.The explanation from the tantra of the four mudrā consorts Wisdom mudrā consort
With the generation stage already accomplished, and especially with the attainment of accomplishment of form and wind accomplishment,357 clear images can be created by thought alone.
Therefore, with oneself clearly visualized as Kālacakra mother and father, on a moon disk at the forehead of both father and mother there is a white oṃ, on a sun disk at the throat a red āḥ, on a Rāhu disk at the heart a black hūḥ, on a Kālāgni disk at the navel a yellow hoḥ, on a gnosis mandala at the secret area a blue svā, and on a space mandala at the crown a green ha.
From one’s secret area, which is in a nonapprehended state, arises a hūḥ, which transforms into a blue five-pointed vajra. At its center is the syllable āḥ which turns into an eight-petal lotus.
From the mother’s secret area, which is in a nonapprehended state, the syllable āḥ appears and transforms into a red eight-petal lotus. In its center is the syllable hūḥ, which transforms into a vajra. With this visualization the yogi single-pointedly meditates on entering into union.
This meditation brings about the melting of the bodhicitta element, which descends from the forehead to the tip of the jewel and is held there without being emitted. This generates the innate bliss of the four joys of descent, followed by the four joys of stable ascent, involving the upward return from the tip of the vajra jewel to the crown. The clear-light mind develops into the nature of this great bliss and meditates single-pointedly on the empty forms, actual or facsimile, that simultaneously appear, as well as on the emptiness that is the noninherent nature of these empty forms. If this is practiced during the period in which an actual phenomenon empty-form mahāmudrā consort has yet to be achieved, the yogi alternates between his own inner meditative concentration and the mudrā consort meditation. These provide mutual enhancement until an actual phenomenon empty-form mahāmudrā consort is attained.
The great Nāropa says: “Meditate” refers to meditation on the wisdom mudrā consort.
The aggregates, spheres, and sources are purified by being in deity aspect. The mandalas are clearly visualized, and the yoga of constant movement causes the fire of gnosis to blaze. The letter hūḥ is burnt, and the moon descends from the forehead to the throat, heart, navel, vajra, and center of lotus. All senses and their objects possessing the nature of this bodhicitta are unified in a one-taste state of great bliss. In this meditative concentration, union is entered into and endures until the approach of the glorious mahāmudrā consort.358
Just as this is applied to a wisdom mudrā consort, it can also be applied to meditations on an activity mudrā consort and on the caṇḍālī fire. Activity mudrā consort
The correct kind of activity mudrā consort to be relied upon is described in the tantras.
The root Hevajra Tantra says:
When discovered, she will have wide open eyes,
adorned with beauty and youth,
camphor and sihla,359
well trained by bodhicitta.360 On this the Vajragarbha Commentary says:
This teaches the characteristics of a mudrā consort. Her eyes are quite large, with the red and white well separated. Her waist is like a vajra.
She is one, age twelve or sixteen, whose blood is flowing and who delights in bodhicitta. Similarly that mudrā consort is to be trained.361 This teaches the characteristics of a mudrā consort and the necessity of training. On the method of training, the tantra continues:
Beginning from the ten virtues, teach her the dharma well;
a mind in deity form, similarly, a well-pledged mind.362 Beginning from the practices of the ten virtues, she is trained in the common path.
Then, as the line, “teach her the dharma well” indicates, she is given initiation and transformed into a suitable receptacle for tantra.
She is taught the meaning of tantra and given vows and pledges according to her level of understanding.
She is trained in the deity yoga of having a “mind in deity form,” becomes wise in the arts of desire, and has a conviction on the view of emptiness.
Using the rituals taught in the tantras, the yogi should rely on such a mudrā consort with these and other skills.
If she is not trained in this way, very serious faults will occur.
The tantra continues:
An untrained girl in Hevajra yoga
weakens the pledges, and one will be ruined.
Train her, therefore, by teaching dharma.363
Knowing these faults, do not enter into erroneous liaison with any female not trained as a mudrā consort, using the power of the winds or various instructions to ensure the drop is not lost as a reason. The way to rely upon a mudrā consort according to the rituals in the tantra is taught in the Root Tantra, quoted in verse 110 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter of the Great Commentary:
A qualified consort aged sixteen,
adorned with youth and beauty;
first teach her well,
then initiate and begin the practice.
Body, speech, mind, and desire,
placed at the brow, and so forth,
svā, ha, at the secret and crown.
Next the lotus is purified.
From the syllable āḥ, an eight-petal lotus;
by the syllable hūḥ it is with vajra.
The cause of movement of the wisdom lotus with vajra
is one’s vajra by the syllable hūḥ,
visualized with five points;
in its center an eight-petal lotus conceived with the syllable āḥ.
With the pride of a vajra holder,
the vajra with the lotus enters the lotus.
With the liṅgam placed into the bhaga, the yogi performs hūḥ phat;
the bodhicitta is not emitted.
The three realms in their entirety
are meditated on as forms of buddhas.364 One should practice as these verses instruct.
Oneself and the mudrā consort are visualized as Kālacakra father and mother invested with deity pride.
At the six places of the forehead and so forth, the seeds of the six families are placed, as is indicated by the lines beginning from “Body, speech, mind, and desire” up to “the secret and crown.” The lines from “Next the lotus is purified” up to “conceived with the syllable āḥ” teach the blessing of the sexual organs and can be understood from the previous explanation on the wisdom mudrā consort.
“With the pride of a vajra holder” indicates that both oneself and the mudrā consort hold the pride of being a deity.
“The vajra with the lotus enters the lotus” together with the line “With the liṅgam placed into the bhaga” teach that a vajra is created from the hūḥ of one’s secret area and is marked by or “with” a lotus.
This liṅgam is placed into the bhaga lotus of the mother. “The yogi performs hūḥ phaṭ” means that the syllable phaṭ causes the bodhicitta element to come as far as the tip of the vajra jewel to create the four joys of descent.
“The bodhicitta is not emitted” indicates that the bodhicitta is not emitted from the tip of the jewel because the significance of hūḥ from the phrase “hūḥ phaṭ” is that the drop of combined mind and wind is drawn back up to create the four joys of stable ascent. The clear-light mind develops into the entity of great bliss. If the empty form appearing at the same time in the aspect of Kālacakra mother and father is a just a similitude, the clear-light mind is placed single-pointedly within it. If that empty form is the definitive and actual empty form, the clear-light mind focuses upon the sexual union of oneself established in the form of Kālacakra mother and father, and desire for the mother is created.
Furthermore the lines “The three realms in their entirety are meditated on as forms of buddhas” indicate that one also meditates on emanating empty-form buddhas filling the entirety of the three realms. Regarding one’s lifestyle while relying upon an activity mudrā consort, the Vajragarbha Commentary says:
Having discovered such a girl,
dwell in distant places,
well prepared with food and drink,
with songs, cymbals, dance,
her body adorned with ornaments,
flowers, and perfumes.
Live well in this good place
and emanate the perfect gnosis.365
From the same text it says:
With one’s powers
summon mudrā consorts from the gods, asura, humans,
kiṃnara, and yakṣa, and examine them well.366 These lines teach that goddesses and so forth should be summoned with special powers and assessed for their suitability to be activity mudrā consorts. A consort should be chosen from among those who are suitable. The explanation from the tantra of the four mudrā consorts
In verse 74 of the Gnosis chapter of the Condensed Tantra it says: With these four mudrā consorts giving fruits of unchanging bliss, in towns, in isolation, cemeteries, unclean, and clean places.367 This line mentions four mudrā consorts.
These are activity mudrā consorts, wisdom mudrā consorts, mahāmudrā consorts, and samaya consorts.
On the activity mudrā consort, Nāropa in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations says:
The activity mudrā has breasts and hair, a cause for bliss in the realm of desire.
The activities are those of cumbanda, embracing, touching the secret area, moving the vajra, and so on. Illustrated by these activities, the mudrā is she who creates reliability.
Reliability here refers to changing bliss.368 Therefore the nature of an activity mudrā consort is a girl who has breasts and hair and a body formed from a collection of atoms.
The activities that establish her as an activity mudrā consort include cumbanda, or kissing, embracing the yogi, touching the secret area, and moving the vajra.
By these activities she is an illustration of reliability.”369 This is the meaning of mudrā, and she is known, therefore, as an activity mudrā consort.
What does reliability mean here? It refers to the mudrā’s own ability to grant “changing bliss,” or the bliss of emission, which is created or illustrated by the mudrā.
The wisdom mudrā consort is explained in the same commentary from the line “The wisdom mudrā consort is completely imputed by one’s mind, goddesses such as Viśvamātā”  up to the line “Concerning reliability, here she shows the moving bliss.”370 Wisdom mudrā consorts are mentally imputed objects of meditation in the forms of goddesses such as Viśvamātā.
Reliability here means that in terms of her own ability, this mudrā consort is able to move the bodhicitta from place to place within the body during meditative union.
On the mahāmudrā consort the same commentary says:
Because she is great  and is a mudrā, she is known as mahāmudrā.
Moreover “great” here means that being possessed of supreme characteristics, she is not insignificant.
Because she is sealed by the bodhicitta vajra, she is a mudrā.
“Reliability” here means being divorced from phenomena conceived by the mind and preceded by the signs of smoke and so forth. This will be understood by the yogi in the clarity of his mind, like prognostic images in a clairvoyant’s mirror.
The resultant mahāmudrā is characterized by mudaṃ, the gnosis of supreme and unchanging bliss.
When the yogi is filled with rati, the mudrā, by the yoga of immobility, will grant this totally and at all times.
Her greatness also is of great abandonment and great insight.
Great abandonment is an abandonment of all obscurations together with their propensities.371 This passage teaches the mahāmudrā consort. It needs a little explanation.
The sentence, “Because she is great and is a mudrā, she is known as mahāmudrā” explains the term mahāmudrā.
The next sentence teaches the meaning of “great,” which is that the empty-form consort, “being possessed of supreme characteristics, she is not insignificant” and has emanated to pervade the entirety of the three realms.
These forms are each in the aspect of mother and father in embrace. To illustrate that “mahāmudrā” refers to the mother, the female gender is used.
Moreover the mother deity of the empty-form Kālacakra mother-and-father embrace that has emanated to pervade the three realms can be confirmed as a “mudrā” because “bodhicitta vajra” here refers to the great unchanging bliss, which is created by this mother, and by not going beyond that, she is therefore “sealed by the bodhicitta vajra.” Because of this “she is a mudrā.”
In this empty-form Kālacakra of mother-and-father embrace, of great significance,  possessed of supreme characteristics, and completely pervading the three realms, what does “reliability” refer to?
It is that the yogi’s mind is divorced from phenomena conceived by the conceptualizing mind.
The yogi, following his experience of the ten signs of smoke and so forth, will understand and experience this like prognostic images in a mirror in the great clarity of his clear-light mind.
Moreover, because this empty-form mahāmudrā consort produces the resultant mahāmudrā consort, she is known as a mudrā.
What is the resultant mahāmudrā consort?
“The resultant mahāmudrā consort is characterized by mudaṃ, the gnosis of supreme and unchanging bliss.” How does the mahāmudrā consort grant this bliss?
She grants it “totally” or perfectly “and at all times” through this yoga. The effect of rati, meaning joy or desire for the mahāmudrā consort, is that the tip of the vajra to the crown of the head is filled with the bodhicitta element where it is held firm without moving to other places.
The meaning of “great” in the term resultant mahāmudrā consort also refers to great abandonment and so on.
In short the empty-form mahāmudrā consort who actually induces the supreme and unchanging bliss is the mother deity of the empty-form Kālacakra in mother-father embrace, as will be described later.
Concerning the samaya mudrā consort the great Nāropa says:
Activity, wisdom, mahāmudrā, samaya: causes and meditations
for clear-light minds,
the fourth is the attainment,
the indestructible.372 The fourth or samaya mudrā consort is the resultant attainment or the “indestructible,” which here means “unchanging” and refers to the great unchanging bliss. Valid cognition Butön Rinpoché says the cognition here is a direct yogic valid cognition.373 However direct yogic valid cognition is a term usually applied to a direct understanding of no-self. It makes no sense for the cognition here to be the direct perception of the coarse no-self of persons.
Moreover, to perceive directly the subtle no-self emptiness, one must be an ārya being, whereas here the yogi who has only completed the yoga of recollection is still an ordinary being.
Our own position is that the empty forms appear directly and clearly, and that the cognition is a nondeceiving, direct mental consciousness. Purification divisions The Great Commentary on verse 115 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter states:
“Recollection of caṇḍālī fire is Amitābha” refers to the recognition aggregate. The caṇḍālī fire is recollected in the central channel. There are ten aspects divided by the ten instances of desire.374
The recognition aggregate, the element of water, the tongue, form, the legs, and the activity of taking are the six phenomena purified.
Just as there are ten occasions for the experience of worldly desire, likewise, because of the caṇḍālī fire in the central channel, there are the ten aspects of smoke and so forth in the meditations on inner and outer images. There are immediate and final results.
The immediate results are that one sees oneself as the deity, limitless light radiates from one’s pores, filling the realms of space, and one’s body is bathed in a halo of light.
The Great Commentary, on verse 119 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
“Recollection is excellently pure.” Recollection, as spoken of here, refers to a mind embracing the forms and divorced from all conception.
Therefore, when they become pure, at that time there are “mandalas of pure light.” The word “also” refers to the five rays of light radiating and traveling through the pores.
“From the gnosis form” means from the empty forms.375
The final results are that the six phenomena of the recognition-aggregate group become freed of obscuration to become the six enlightened phenomena, Amitābha and so forth. The Yoga of Meditative Concentration The branch of meditative concentration: The final meditative attainment This section is under six headings:
1.Meaning of the term 2.Time for meditation
3.The meditation
4.Valid cognition
5.Purification divisions
6.Results Meaning of the term Unchanging bliss is achieved from desire for the empty-form mahāmudrā consort. The mind is placed single-pointedly in the indivisibility of emptiness endowed with every supreme aspect and unchanging bliss, hence the term meditative concentration.
The Great Commentary, on verse 117 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says: “In the nature of wisdom and method” means that consciousness and the object of consciousness are mixed as one, and the power that is the unchanging bliss is a meditative concentration upon gnosis form.376
The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary also says:
Concerning meditative concentration, unchanging bliss is achieved from the yearning for the desired goddess.
This nondual mind, divorced of consciousness of subject and object, is spoken of by the tathāgatas as meditative concentration.377 Time for meditation When the recollection body has been attained and the four joys of descent and stable ascent are accomplished from reliance on activity mudrā consorts, wisdom mudrā consorts, and the caṇḍālī fire, one has become well trained in the path of recollection, and the mind has been ripened for the ability to create unchanging bliss.
Once the yogi has the ability to induce unchanging bliss because of familiarity with desire for the mahāmudrā consort, the meditations of meditative concentration should begin.
The Great Commentary, on verse 113 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
Next is great accomplishment. When there is union with wisdom, when the unmoving bliss is to be created, this is definitely the time of great accomplishment.
“From the subtle yogas” teaches that great accomplishment is achieved definitively from the fluid well joined onto the “woman of excellent mind” channel.378 “When there is union with wisdom,” or mudrā consort, and when the unchanging bliss is to be created in reliance on the drops not moving to other places,  this is definitely the time to meditate on the great accomplishment — the branch of meditative concentration.
What is the nature of this great accomplishment?
Subtle yoga practice is taught at two levels — the provisional generation-stage practice and the definitive completion-stage practice. In the definitive practice the red and white fluid elements are “well joined onto,” or inside, the “woman of excellent mind,” or central channel, and do not move to other places. From this arises the great unchanging bliss, explained as being the meditative concentration great accomplishment.
The meditation This has three outlines:
1.The nature of the branch of meditative concentration 2.Divisions
3.The way to meditate The nature of the branch of meditative concentration
Meditative concentration is a gnosis that is the indivisibility of an unchanging great-bliss consciousness and the object of that consciousness, an emptiness form endowed with every supreme aspect, which has the power to transform all aggregates, sources, and elements into nonobscured phenomena, as mercury transforms base metal into gold.
As the previously quoted passage from the Great Commentary says:
“In the nature of wisdom and method” means that consciousness and the object of consciousness are mixed as one,  and the power that is the unchanging bliss is a meditative concentration upon gnosis form.379 In the Later Guhyasamāja Tantra it says:
With wisdom and method in union,
all phenomena are gathered.
By the yoga of amassing,
the image is meditated on in the center.
An instance of gnosis complete
is called meditative concentration.380 Nāropa in his Commentary on a Short Teaching on Initiations says of this verse:
The lines beginning “With wisdom” speak of the sixth branch.
“With wisdom and method in union” refers to the stages of similar-to-cause and so forth, which rise in the space of the lotuses. By the power of the unchanging bliss, consciousness and object of consciousness are mixed as one. At these uncontaminated times all animate and inanimate phenomena are “gathered,” or brought together, as well-illumined forms, and with the yoga of amassing they are consumed by the clear light solely in emptiness form, in its nature of the nonfalling supreme bliss, like the taste of forms when all the elements — iron and so forth — are made into a form of one taste.
In the center of the clear light, at one with the nonfalling supreme bliss, is the image whose nature is conventional truth and is to be meditated upon.
A more detailed explanation of this is found in the lines beginning “An instance.” The gnosis is nondual in terms of the two truths, and when an instance of this is complete or perceived, it is known by the name of the branch of meditative concentration.381
This passage needs a little explanation.
Concerning the line “With wisdom and method in union,” the Root Tantra says, “The stages of similar-to-cause travel upward.” Therefore, by the stages of similar-to-cause and so forth,382 the bodhicitta element rises up from the tip of the vajra jewel to the crown in the dhūtī space of the cakras from lotus to lotus. At these cakras they do not change or move to other places and therefore produce unchanging bliss.
By the power of this unchanging bliss, the emptiness form, endowed with every supreme aspect as an object of consciousness, and unchanging-bliss consciousness merge to become one entity. This acts as an opponent force to destroy portions of the obscurations, and at such uncontaminated times all phenomena, as illustrated by the inanimate environment and the animate living beings in it, are gathered together as illumined empty forms. This is the meaning of the term gathered.
The meaning of the line “By the yoga of amassing” is that the “clear light solely in emptiness form, in its nature of the nonfalling,” or unchanging supreme bliss, consumes and transforms all the aggregates, elements, and sources into nonobscured phenomena.
For example, “like the taste of forms when all elements — iron and so forth — are made into a form of one taste,”  referring to the process in which elements are consumed by mercury and transformed into gold.
The meaning of the line beginning “In the center of the clear light” is that because of the above reasons, one should meditate upon the image, or empty form, “whose nature is a conventional truth,” in the center of, or indivisible from, the clear light that is of “one taste with the supreme nonfalling bliss,” or unchanging bliss.
The lines beginning “The gnosis is nondual” refer to the two truths. These are:
the ultimate truth, which here refers to the unchanging bliss that perceives emptiness and is an example of a consciousness being given the name of its object; and the conventional truth, which is the empty forms. These become nondual, and when “an instance of this is complete or perceived, it is known by the name of the branch of meditative concentration.” Divisions This has two headings:
1.Division by cause and basis
2.Division by nature
Division by cause and basis
There is meditative concentration in the minds of those of low intelligence and developed by reliance upon an activity mudrā consort, meditative concentration in the minds of those of middling intelligence developed by reliance upon a wisdom mudrā consort, and meditative concentration in the minds of those of high intelligence developed by reliance solely upon a mahāmudrā consort. This division is taught in verse 117 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter of the Condensed Tantra:
As these are divided by being of low intelligence and so forth, there are three different and main methods of practice.
Three consorts and three times by three paths, karma and conception become the supreme.383
The Great Commentary on this verse says:
“As these are divided by being of low intelligence and so forth, there are three different and main methods of practice” of the Kālacakra.
“Three consorts and three times by three paths” refers to the path of the falling bodhicitta during the times of those of low intelligence, the path of moving bodhicitta during the times of those of middling intelligence, and the path of the nonmoving bodhicitta during the times of those of high intelligence.
Among these, the activity mudrā consort is the giver of the bliss of falling, the wisdom mudrā consort is the giver of the bliss of movement, and the mahāmudrā consort is the giver of the nonmoving bliss.
In this way the Buddha taught the meditations of the three mudrā consorts in the six branches. Therefore the yogi should meditate on the six yogas.384 The divisions of meditative concentration are taught in this passage.
How are they taught?
The words “In this way” refer to the preceding explanation of the words of the tantra.
The line “the Buddha taught the meditations of the three mudrā consorts in the six branches” refers to all six branches. The three types of reliance upon the three mudrā consorts, therefore, must be applied in the branch of meditative concentration too. The words of the tantra and corresponding commentary passage require some explanation.
As these six branches are divided into meditators “of low intelligence and so forth,” meaning those of middling and high intelligence also, “there are three different and main methods of practice of the Kālacakra” in this branch of meditative concentration.
“Three times” refers to the three occasions of practice for those of low, middling, and high intelligence, who rely on activity, wisdom, and mahāmudrā consorts respectively.
The reason for this reliance is that “by three paths,” practitioners develop the unchanging bliss of the branch of meditative concentration. “Those of low intelligence” must rely upon a mudrā consort who grants the “path of falling bodhicitta” in order to induce the unchanging bliss. “Those of middling intelligence” rely upon a mudrā consort who grants “the path of moving bodhicitta” as a way of inducing the unchanging bliss. “Those of high intelligence” rely solely upon a mudrā consort who grants “the path of the nonmoving bodhicitta” in order to induce the unchanging bliss.
Therefore, among these three consorts, “the activity mudrā consort is the giver of the bliss of falling” bodhicitta, “the wisdom mudrā consort is the giver of the bliss of movement” of bodhicitta to other places in the body,  and “the mahāmudrā consort is the giver of the nonmoving,” or unchanging “bliss.”
The descriptions of the activity and wisdom mudrā consorts as consorts who grant falling and moving bliss is made on the basis of these mudrā consorts’ own abilities. During practices such as the branch of meditative concentration, one can induce bliss by relying upon an activity mudrā consort, but the bodhicitta is withheld from emission.
That these tantra and commentary passages refer to the branch of meditative concentration can be understood by the lines “the path of the nonmoving bodhicitta during the times of those of high intelligence” and “the mahāmudrā consort is the giver of the nonmoving bliss.” This is because the granting of unchanging bliss by a mahāmudrā consort can only occur on the branch of meditative concentration.
Furthermore A Short Teaching on Initiations states:
By union with an activity mudrā,
visualization of a wisdom mudrā,
becoming one with mahāmudrā consort,
increase the unchanging bliss.385 Division by nature This has two headings: 1.Division into two isolates386
2.Division by numbers
Division into two isolates These are: the supreme unchanging bliss that is single-pointedly engaged in nonaspected emptiness and, secondly, the empty-form Kālacakra, indivisible from that emptiness, in mother-and-father embrace and adorned with the features and marks of an enlightened being. Division by the numbers This is in three outlines:
1.The actual division 2.An explanation of the progression 3.An examination of areas of doubt
The actual division This is a division into 21,600 instances of unchanging bliss.
These can be divided into twelve levels. The tip of the vajra jewel to the secret area is divided into two parts. The first part filled with bodhicitta, unchanging and unmoving, produces 1,800 instances of unchanging bliss. This constitutes the first level. Likewise the second part filled with unchanging and unmoving bodhicitta also produces 1,800 instances of unchanging bliss.
This is the second level.
Similarly the area up to the navel cakra filled with unmoving bodhicitta will produce 3,600 instances of unchanging bliss.
The first 1,800 is the third level and the second 1,800 is the fourth.
3,600 instances of unchanging bliss are produced by the bodhicitta filling the area up to the heart cakra.
The first 1,800 belong to the fifth level and the second to the sixth level. 3,600 instances of unchanging bliss are produced from the bodhi citta filling the area up to the throat cakra.
The first 1,800 belong to the seventh level and the second to the eighth.
3,600 instances of unchanging bliss are produced by the bodhicitta filling the area up to the forehead cakra. The first 1,800 belong to the ninth level and the second to the tenth level. 3,600 instances of unchanging bliss are produced from the bodhicitta, unmoving and unchanging, that fills the area up to the crown cakra. The first 1,800 belong to the eleventh level and the second to the twelfth level. An explanation of the progression
One drop within the central channel at the very tip of the vajra jewel, staying in one place and not moving elsewhere, produces the first instance of unchanging bliss.
That drop consumes and destroys one of the 21,600 larger portions that the material body is divided into.
This first instance of unchanging bliss “kills” or eliminates one breath of the 21,600 breaths that flow in one day. In a similar manner, one instance of unchanging bliss is produced from each of the 21,600 drops.
Each drop consumes one part of the material body, and each instance of bliss destroys one breath or wind.
The Great Commentary on verse 117 of the Gnosis chapter says:
Next, full and perfect enlightenment by single instances. In the line “The instance at the end and beginning of desire and nondesire,” the word “desire” refers to the bright side of the month, and its “end” refers to the sixteenth.
“Nondesire” refers to the dark side of the month, and its “beginning” means not having entered the dark side and is the time of full and perfect enlightenment.
“Also the instances are the number of breaths” means that they increase to 21,600.
From the tip of the secret vajra jewel, the instances are multiplied to 3,600, and that number of winds are killed. Moving to the lotus of the secret area, two levels have been reached.
Similarly, at the navel, heart, throat, and forehead, four, six, eight, and ten are reached. At the crown all winds are ended. This is the twelfth.387
To explain this passage a little, “Full and perfect enlightenment by single instances” refers to instances of unchanging bliss.
How is this attained? In the outer world the waxing period or bright side of the moon is divided into fifteen sections, and although in reality there is no sixteenth after these fifteen, a sixteenth is mentally created at the point of entry into the first division of the dark side.
Therefore “at the end” of the bright side is the sixteenth part.
Likewise, internally from the large toe of the left foot to the crown, the increase in the white part of the drops is divided into sixteen, and the last of these “refers to the sixteenth.” On the path, the bodhicitta descends from the crown to the tip of the vajra jewel to create the sixteen joys, at the end of which the first instance of unchanging bliss is formed and increases until its last increase, at the end of which full and perfect buddhahood is attained.
This is “full and perfect enlightenment by single instances.” How these instances increase is taught by the lines beginning “Also, the instances.” This has been explained previously.
Although these instances of supreme and unchanging bliss arise from their special cause, which is the empty-form mahāmudrā consort in the aspect of Viśvamātā, each of the 21,600 instances of unchanging bliss is indivisible from oneself as an empty-form Kālacakra in mother-and-father aspect. This is the significance of the nonworldly fourth initiation.
The authority for this assertion can be known from a verse from A Short Teaching on Initiations beginning “From desire for the mahāmudrā,”388 which was quoted in the explanation of the fourth initiation from the Initiation chapter, and the detailed explanations given there should be recalled.
An examination of areas of doubt This is under two headings: 1.How the instances of supreme and unchanging bliss are assigned to the levels
2.How bliss meditates upon emptiness How the instances of supreme and unchanging bliss are assigned to the levels This has two outlines: 1.The basis for the examination, the Great Commentary text on the twelve levels
2.An examination of the areas of doubt regarding this text The basis for the examination, the Great Commentary text on the twelve levels
The relevant text is found in the Supreme and Unchanging Gnosis summary from the Gnosis chapter beginning from the lines,
From the attainment of the first level comes the perfect seeing that is ultimately the nonseeing of the world realms of the ten directions. and continues until, “Then, the great thousand” refers to the world realms of the great uncountable. The perfect seeing that is the nonseeing of these worlds is the attainment of the twelfth level of perfect enlightenment. This is not attained by the absence of “changing” desire.
It is by the instances of unchanging bliss arising from desire for wisdom that these tathāgata levels are achieved.
Accomplishing 1,800 nonmoving instances is to attain the first level, and by these numbers the twelve levels are finally attained.
By 21,600 unchanging instances, the twelve levels are reached and the links of dependent origination are negated.389
An examination of the areas of doubt regarding this text This has two outlines: 1.The positions of past scholars and their invalidity 2.A statement of our own understanding The positions of past scholars and their invalidity
The omniscient Butön in his Sheaves of Definitive Meanings says:
On this, some say that the Perfection Vehicle level390 known as all light is an instance of the cause being given the name of the effect and that it is labeled “enlightenment” but actually is not enlightenment. Here he presents the other’s position.
In refutation he says:
That is incorrect.
In Sheaves of Oral Transmission and the Hevajra Commentary by Bhavabhadra, it is stated that the level of all light is the level of buddha.
In Garland of Pearls391 also it is stated as being the level of buddha.392
Concerning his own position:
Therefore, in the Perfection Vehicle system, the tenth level consists of the mere, the special, and the uninterrupted path. Of these three the uninterrupted path is the eleventh level of the Kālacakra tradition, and the level of all light is the level of buddha.
The validity of other parts of these passages will be explained later, but to posit all light as the level of buddha and then to say that this is the twelfth level of the Kālacakra tradition is incorrect, because on the twelfth level in this tradition, 1,799 instances of unchanging bliss out of a set of 1,800 belong to the path of practice.393
The master Śāntipa394 and Bhavabhadra say that the twelve levels are made up by the level of practice by belief,395 the ten bodhisattva levels, and the level all light.
Other scholars also assert that the first set of 1,800 instances of unchanging bliss is the level of practice by belief and that the second set is the first bodhisattva level, great joy.
Similarly others maintain that the first level begins with the last moment of the first set of 1,800.
It is incorrect to posit the first of the twelve levels in this tradition as being the level of practice by belief.
If the first level with its initial set of 1,800 instances of unchanging bliss is equated with the level of practice by belief, then the tenth set of 1,800 would have to correspond to the ninth level, excellent mind.
If that were the case, “glorious Vajrapāṇi, the mighty one of the tenth level,” would have to be on the ninth level, because the Great Commentary states, as will be quoted, that of the 21,600 karmic winds of Vajrapāṇi, 3,600 remain undestroyed  and that he has not reached the eleventh level of this tradition.
Sūryaśrī in his Filled with Good Qualities says:
By the process of attaining two levels at each of the cakras, one becomes the mighty one of the twelve levels.
In this way, by negating 3,600 in-and-out breaths at the secret cakra, the two levels of great joy and purity are attained.
By negating the same at the navel cakra, the two levels of light and blazing light are attained.
Similarly, at the heart lotus, the levels of hard to overcome and manifest are attained.396 Therefore the above assertions contradict the fact that the first ten of the twelve levels of the Kālacakra tradition correspond to the ten levels of great joy and so forth. In a work called Opening the Secrets of the Three Tantras it says:
When an arhat has exhausted his bodily formation he inhabits a mental body. This body is similar to a bardo body and to a dream body.
However it is not an actual bardo body nor is it an actual dream body.
Nevertheless, if he enters the Mahayana, he enters it with this mental body. Prior to entering the Mahayana he increases his powers of clairvoyance and so forth. By doing so he moves through the eleven lower levels and only then enters the Mahayana. Are there differences in the qualities of these levels?
The Great Commentary says, “Counting begins from the perfect seeing, that is the nonseeing of the world realms”397 Therefore with the attainment of the first level comes the perfect seeing of one ten-direction world realm.
With the attainment of the second comes two.398
In the Great Commentary the 21,600 instances of unchanging bliss are spoken of as the twelve levels,399 and in the above passage the qualities of these twelve levels are assigned to the qualities of a Hinayana arhat entering the Mahayana with a mental body. This appears to be a very distorted explanation.
These passages from the Great Commentary are passages at the very heart of the path of the branch of meditative concentration,  which is explained by condensing the 21,600 instances of unchanging bliss into twelve levels.
Such a core path is for the intended disciples of the Kālacakra who enter the path of mantra from its beginning.
How could it be for those of the Hinayana who enter the Mahayana!
Furthermore, for those of the Hinayana to enter the Mahayana at the branch of meditative concentration would be like a calf becoming an old bull without the intervening process of growing up. Moreover it seems that this scholar thinks the following.
When the 21,600 instances of unchanging bliss have been achieved and the winds of the twelve lagna400 have been negated, then will the gnosis body be gained and not before.
Moreover this gnosis body is attained when the first of the Perfection Vehicle levels is attained.
In his work Opening the Secrets of the Three Tantras, he says:
Bright Lamp says, “In the Laṅkāvatārasūtra it says, ‘Having attained the level of great joy, he will go to Sukhāvatī.’”401 Therefore, when explaining the meaning of the master Nāgārjuna’s attainment of the level of great joy, the assertion that he gained the form of Vajradhara endowed with every supreme aspect is made on the basis of that union or gnosis body being labeled as buddha.
If this were the case, it would have to follow that the ārya Vajrapāṇi, the mighty one of the tenth level, would not have previously attained even the first level of great joy, because it is clearly stated in the Great Commentary that the movements of 3,600 karmic winds, or two lagna, of Vajrapāṇi have not been negated.
The second summary from the Realms chapter of the Great Commentary says:
The master of the great yakṣa dwells in the Place of Corpses402 like the “master of the beasts of the forests.” Internally “corpse” refers to the cessation of 21,600 in-and-out breaths less 3,600.
“He dwells here, on the level of the cloud of dharma,” means that by dwelling there, he dwells in the Place of Corpses.403 Furthermore, if the completion of the 21,600 instances of unchanging bliss explained as being the attainment of the states of Vajrasattva and Vajradhara  is equated with the attainment of a gnosis body realized on the first level, then consider these passages from the Great Commentary:
The final signs are those of the Buddha and of Vajradhara. This is the twelfth level attained by 21,600 instances of supreme and unchanging bliss. This attainment is the actual attainment of the great mahāmudrā.404
In order to teach living beings worldly and nonworldly dharma, the enlightened conqueror, the Buddha, already the mighty one of the twelve levels, wise, master of the great illusion, of the great magical and optical illusion, was born in Lumbini of the Śākya family.405 If the above assertion were correct, the twelve levels mentioned in these passages would have to be levels attained prior to the attainment of the first level of the Perfection Vehicle tradition.
In that case the description “wise, master of the great illusion” and so on would have to be explained as not referring to an actual enlightened being. This is beyond words. There is a lot more to say on this subject, but that is enough for now. A statement of our own understanding
As the omniscient Butön has said, the first level in the Kālacakra tradition corresponds to the first ārya level, great joy, and the ninth level corresponds to the ninth ārya level, excellent mind.
In the Perfection Vehicle tradition the tenth level, the cloud of dharma, is divided into the mere, the special, and the uninterrupted paths.
In the Kālacakra tradition the tenth level is the mere tenth, the eleventh is the special path, and the twelfth is the uninterrupted path.
The end of the twelfth, after instance 21,600 of unchanging bliss, is established as the level of all light, or the eleventh-level406 state of Vajradhara.
The qualities gained from these levels are taught in the Great Commentary beginning from “From the attainment of the first level comes the perfect seeing that is ultimately the nonseeing of the world realms of the ten directions” up to “From the attainment of the tenth level comes the perfect seeing of 512 world realms of the ten directions.”407 The qualities mentioned here are far fewer than those mentioned in the Madhyamakāvatāra, and they especially seem to contradict the verse from the Madhyamakāvatāra that runs:
The qualities here on the tenth are far beyond the abilities of speech;
not within the realms of speech, Buddha fields gained as many in number
as the number of atoms.408
You might say that the qualities of the levels taught in the Madhyamakāvatāra come from the Sutra of the Ten Levels, so how can the levels as they are taught in the Kālacakra tradition be a valid description of the ten levels of the ārya? Well, what if you were to say that the qualities of the levels taught in the Madhyamakāvatāra are wrong because they contradict those of the Kālacakra?
I think that just as praising the Buddha by talking of his features and signs of enlightenment is to speak of only a part of Buddha’s qualities, so the qualities of the levels as taught in the Great Commentary are but a fraction of his qualities, but scholars should examine this.
How bliss meditates upon emptiness This has two outlines:
1.Examining doubts over the nature of the emptiness to be meditated upon
2.A brief explanation of how bliss meditates upon emptiness
Some say that the emptiness to be meditated on in the glorious Kālacakra refers solely to the emptiness endowed with every supreme aspect, because emptiness as mere negation of the object of refutation as taught in the Perfection Vehicle is explained as having no essence.
This, they say, is confirmed by A Short Teaching on Our Assertions Concerning the View, which says:
The emptiness of examining the aggregates
is without essence like the plantain tree.
Emptiness endowed with supreme characteristics
is not like that.409
In reply to this assertion it has been said:
“The emptiness of examining the aggregates is without essence like the plantain tree.” The meaning of these lines is that when examining the aggregates with analysis and nothing is found, it is “without essence” to conclude that nothing therefore exists at all and to fall to a view of nihilism.
Synonymous with that is a quote from the Supreme and Unchanging summary in the Gnosis chapter:
“The emptiness that comes from examining phenomena that are a collection of subtle atoms is an emptiness far from a nonexistence emptiness.”410 Therefore you should be ashamed to deprecate the emptiness that is the nature of all phenomena.411
However the verses of A Short Teaching on Assertions Concerning the View can be understood in the following way:
The emptiness of examining the aggregates
is without essence like the plantain tree.
Emptiness endowed with supreme characteristics
is not like that. Emptiness seen as phenomena,
without birth, without cessation:
Meditation upon that emptiness
is not investigation of the aggregates.
All phenomena are empty,
said by the Buddha to be without essence.
For practitioners to see emptiness,
he taught this method.
All phenomena of compassion
are said by the Buddha to be without essence.
For practitioners to see compassion,
he taught this method.
Pacification that is without beginning or ending,
the fundamental nature412 of phenomena and nonphenomena extinct, the indivisibility of emptiness and compassion,
this is taught to be bodhicitta.413 If these verses are explained in detail, the context will be more easily understood. The emptiness taught as an object of meditation in A Short Teaching on Assertions Concerning the View, which supplements the Kālacakra, is of two types: nonaspected emptiness and aspected emptiness. The first type is an emptiness in which the aggregates and so forth are investigated by an analytical mind and, like the plantain tree, their essence is not to be found.
Aspected emptiness or empty-form “emptiness endowed with supreme characteristics is not like that.” It is not an emptiness that is the mere refutation of the object to be refuted by analysis.
So what is it?
It refers to forms of “emptiness seen as phenomena” of the three realms, characterized by being devoid of the nature of birth or cessation like images in a prognostic mirror.
Meditation upon that emptiness is not like the meditation in which the aggregates and so forth are investigated by an analytical mind.
Therefore when all phenomena, the aggregates and so forth, are investigated with an analytical mind, the result is an emptiness of not finding a single atom. Therefore all phenomena are said by the Buddha to be without essence.
He taught this as a method for practitioners of this path to see aspected and nonaspected emptiness. Similarly, when all phenomena of compassion, common or exclusive, are investigated by analysis, not a single atom is found. Therefore the Buddha said that they were without essence like the plantain tree.
Nevertheless, for practitioners of this path, he taught this as a method to see the common compassion and exclusive compassion, or unchanging bliss.
In this way, the lack of any inherent beginning or ending is “pacification.” Phenomena and nonphenomena extinct since beginningless time is “the fundamental nature.” Aspected and nonaspected emptiness and compassion, or unchanging bliss, are indivisible.
This is taught to be bodhicitta.
If these verses are explained all together, the meaning of the verse beginning “The emptiness of examining the aggregates” is still as explained above.
Similarly the meaning of the line from the Supreme and Unchanging summary in the Gnosis chapter that runs “The emptiness that comes from examining phenomena that are a collection of subtle atoms is an emptiness far from a nonexistence emptiness” must also accord with how I have explained the verse beginning “The emptiness of examining the aggregates.” This is because this line is quoted by Anupamarakṣita in his Six Yogas and explained by Sūryaśrī in his commentary to this text.414
So as not to fall into the systems of Vaibhāṣika, Sautrāntika, and Yogācāra, “The emptiness that comes from examining phenomena that are a collection of subtle atoms.”
After this introduction he continues:
So as not to enter the systems of the hedonist Cārvāka, so as to cast far away the nihilist, “an emptiness far from nonexistence.”
Therefore the verse beginning “The emptiness of examining the aggregates” teaches both aspected and nonaspected emptiness as ultimate meditations of this path.
The lack of essence mentioned in the lines “is without essence like the plantain tree” and “All phenomena of compassion, said by the Buddha to be without essence” is explained in the Bodhicaryāvatāra:
For example, the plantain trunk, when cut up, is nothing.
Likewise, when investigated,
the self too is not genuine.415
A sutra also says:
Just as someone might split the unripe trunk of the plantain tree to seek its essence only to find no essence within or without, so should you know all phenomena.416
This lack of essence can be compared to the lack of essence of a plantain tree. Therefore do not misconstrue the meaning of this term. Furthermore those who say that the emptiness ascertained by a practitioner of the Madhyamaka in the Perfection Vehicle is not the emptiness that is the ultimate object of meditation for the great bliss of highest yoga tantra, because there is an even higher emptiness, are not correct. Investigation of the Views of Ourselves and Others summary from the Inner chapter of the Great Commentary states: It is taught that first the views of the outsiders are refuted.
Then the views of the first three of our tenets are refuted.
Finally the unchanging great bliss meditates upon the emptiness ascertained by the Mādhyamika.
Just how is this taught?417 In the same summary it says:
Similarly the tantra says:
“Space, cessation, uncompounded phenomena, these three are permanent.
All that is compounded is impermanent.
Self is empty, there is no doer.
Perception born from the senses, without taking on the aspect,
directly perceives the collection of atoms.
These are the assertions of the Vaibhāṣika from the ocean of Kashmiri texts.”418
This is a presentation of Vaibhāṣika tenets.
The tantra continues:
Objects creating consciousness with aspect
do not appear to sense organs.
Space is like the barren woman’s son,
cessation is like space,
compositional factors have no form,
the three times are not concomitant,
there is no form that does not obstruct,
this is understood by the Sautrāntika.419
Having presented the Sautrāntika tenets the tantra continues:
There is no holder of parts,
and subtle atoms do not exist;
like experiences in a dream,
they appear as nonobjects;
ultimate consciousness exists,
freed from subject and object.
These are proclaimed for crossing the ocean of the Yogācāra doctrine.420
After these presentations the exclusive assertions of each of these tenets is refuted.
The Condensed Tantra states:
Those who say that “person” inhabits the body, their tenet is weakened by examination of its nature.421 This is a refutation of the Vaibhāṣika. Those who hold to conventional truth also
do not know the ultimate, holding it as nonexistent.422 This is a refutation of the Sautrāntika. Those who hold the three realms to be consciousness assert the existence of consciousness.423
This presents the assertion of the Vijñāvāda.424 The Great Commentary then continues primarily with a refutation of that assertion and incidentally with a refutation of the first two tenet systems’ assertion of truly existing compounded phenomena.
This section begins: Therefore, analytically searching for a consciousness with a single or manifold nature, it is not found, and so the asserters of consciousness are weakened.425 The Great Commentary continues with a refutation of the phenomena asserters,426 who claim that creation, duration, and destruction exist by their own natures, and then proceeds to an ascertainment of the subtle emptiness that is the Madhyamaka view.
This passage runs from “Now the faults of momentary birth and destruction are taught” up to “It could not arise from a combination because they would be mutually exclusive and therefore not one.”427
The commentary continues:
“Therefore the Mādhyamika say
that the wise do not assert consciousness to exist ultimately.
Not possessing a nature that is one or many it is like a lotus in the sky.
Not existing, not nonexisting,
not possessing the natures of these two,
freed from the four extremes.
This is known by the Mādhyamika.”
Those who weaken the extremes are not weakened.
“They propound nondual emptiness and compassion” means that here compassion, nonapprehending and nonconceptual, together with emptiness supreme in all aspects, will enter the three times for the sake of the knowledge of the three times.
They are of the tenet of the buddhas.428
To explain this a little:
the verses ending with the line “This is known by the Mādhyamika”  refer to the way Mādhyamikas ascertain emptiness.
Those persons of the Madhyamaka school who “weaken the two extremes” of existence and nonexistence do not fall from reality.
How do Mādhyamikas not fall from reality?
“They propound nondual emptiness and compassion.” This is the main topic, and is explained by the following lines.
“Here,” at this juncture, when the main themes of Kālacakra are being practiced, the yoga of “compassion” or unchanging bliss, which is “nonapprehending and nonconceptual,” one-pointedly dwells in the emptiness ascertained by the Mādhyamika, in union with and indivisible from “emptiness supreme in all aspects. With the Madhyamaka view of reality, it will enter the three times for the sake of gaining “the knowledge of the three times.” If a meaningful understanding of this passage is not reached, the foundation for the ultimate great-bliss meditation will not be there.
The discerning mind, therefore, needs to exercise great subtlety on this point.
Furthermore it says in the Supreme and Unchanging summary:
Because of this, by the force of the instincts of the four kinds of Buddhists, the Buddha taught the meditation of the impermanence of self to those who propound the self.
Those who propound phenomena are taught the totality meditations on earth, and so forth.429 Those who propound consciousness are taught the meditative concentration upon mere perception. The Mādhyamika are taught meditations upon the dreamlike, unchanging, and nondual gnosis. In this way there is the nonself of persons and the nonself of phenomena.
There is the nirvana with remainder of the Vaibhāṣika, Sautrāntika, and Yogācāra.
There is the nirvana without remainder, the nonabiding, of the Mādhyamika in which all cause and effect has ceased.430 This passage too states that the Madhyamaka view is the ultimate view of the meditations of highest mantra. A brief explanation of how bliss meditates upon emptiness
The unchanging bliss consciousness meditates on the very emptiness ascertained by the Mādhyamika through the lines “Not existing, not nonexisting,” and so forth. This is the position of the tantra and commentary as has just been explained. As to how that is accomplished, initially the mind is trained in the common path. The King of Meditative Concentration Sutra states:
If phenomena are analyzed for nonself, and if that analysis is meditated upon,
this becomes the cause for the fruit of nirvana;
other causes will bring no such peace.431 As this quote indicates, the subtle emptiness as taught by the protector Nāgārjuna and the glorious Candrakīrti is initially ascertained by study and thought. That is meditatively analyzed again and again to produce an actual or similitude special insight432 in which deep ascertainment433 of this subtle emptiness is experienced. Eventually, when the innate bliss is generated, that emptiness is recalled by this bliss, and placement meditation is practiced on that emptiness in a meditative state where no objects are to be analyzed or conceived.
Such a bliss-and-emptiness gnosis is the supreme of all special insights.
The reason for using meditative analysis434 when one first meditates to develop special insight is that it increases the strength of the ascertaining mind’s hold on emptiness.
When great bliss is nonanalytically and single-pointedly placed on emptiness, the hold of the ascertaining mind also becomes stronger.
The reason for this is that for as long as one remains in the meditative concentration on bliss and emptiness, the moving winds of the conceptual minds are stilled and not present, which means that the mode of apprehension will not weaken.
Moreover, because great bliss is the best consciousness for meditating upon emptiness, that apprehension will actually become stronger.
Furthermore bliss that takes emptiness as its object brings about the descent and stable ascent of the bodhicitta element in the central channel and prevents it from moving elsewhere.
This creates a special bliss within the body, which becomes the causal condition for the primordial or clear-light mind to develop into the entity of great bliss. The way to meditate This is under two headings:
1.Identifying the mahāmudrā consort, the special cause of unchanging bliss
2.How the meditations of the three types of practitioners rely on the mahāmudrā consort to develop the unchanging bliss Identifying the mahāmudrā consort, the special cause of unchanging bliss The mahāmudrā consort is the mother deity of the Kālacakra in the aspect of mother-and-father embrace developed as an actual phenomenon during the branch of recollection.
This is the meaning of the previously quoted lines from the seventy-third verse of the Gnosis chapter:
In a flash of lightning resemblance arises a definitive creator of unmoving bliss, all features complete.435
Also verse 113 says:
A mere apparition of the mind, born from the mind, like a reflection in a mirror,
upon whom all bodhisattvas and buddhas have relied, upon whom the mighty yogis rely.436 Using these verses as an authority, the Supreme and Unchanging summary from the Great Commentary says:
Until the finality of enlightenment the yogi meditates on this mahāmudrā, this mere appearance within the mind.437 Furthermore, in verse 198 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, it says:
Mudrā, like an illusion, in mind and space like an image in a mirror;
myriad beams radiate forth like pure lightning, illuminating the three worlds,
the external inseparable from the body, a nonobject, a mere appearance, the mind dwelling in space,
embracing the nature of mind, the forms of many beings are solely this mudrā.438
And further on:
For the attainment of perfect enlightenment, the she-creator of supreme buddha, supreme, unsullied mudrā consort, unchanging in aspect,
all-pervading, dispelling darkness vast as space, the path traveled by yogis, forever unchanging, the radiance of gnosis destroying the impurities of existence,
meditate upon this wisdom of Kālacakra.439 The mahāmudrā consort is as described here and in many other verses. She is to be recognized as the form of Viśvamātā embraced by Kālacakra.
The Supreme and Unchanging summary from the Great Commentary says: The mahāmudrā consort is of the noninherent nature of all phenomena, endowed with every feature supreme, the Prajñāpāramitā, the creator of buddha.
She is also known as “the source”440 because from this source all noninherently existing phenomena arise.
The noninherently existing phenomena include the ten powers, the non-fears, and so forth of the 84,000 groups of dharmas.
The arising of these is from the source, the realm of buddha.
The place of the buddhas and the bodhisattvas is a place of joy and a place of birth.
That which gives rise to blood, urine, and semen is not the source.
Here the realms of desire and nondesire of those of samsara are not those of the tathāgata.
Therefore the source has the nature of the dharmadhātu;
it is Viśvamātā embraced by Buddha Kālacakra and at all times is divorced from all obscuration.441 These and other passages clearly teach that when the yogi arises in the form of Kālacakra in the aspect of mother-and-father embrace, the mahāmudrā consort refers to the mother in the form of Viśvamātā. Therefore, as previously explained, yogis of high intelligence enter union with as many mahāmudrā consorts as there are atoms in Mount Meru, and these mahāmudrā consorts are mostly in the form of Viśvamātā. How the meditations of the three types of practitioners rely on the mahāmudrā consort to develop the unchanging bliss
Practitioners of high, middling, and low intelligence in the form of Kālacakra mother and father must focus on mother-and-father union and dwell single-pointedly in that desire.
The Cakrasaṃvara Commentary says: Concerning meditative concentration, unchanging bliss is achieved from the yearning for the desired goddess.442
Nāropa’s commentary to A Short Teaching on Initiations repeats these words of the Cakrasaṃvara Commentary.443 In the Supreme and Unchanging summary of the Great Commentary, an opponent is questioning the thinking of the Great Commentary:
How does the yogi develop desire in his mind for an apparition of the mind, then destroy the obscurations of the mind and enjoy the gnosis of unchanging bliss when this apparition is a body devoid of atoms?444
A Short Teaching on Initiations says: From desire for the mahāmudrā consort,
unmoving bliss is born; initiated by the great wisdom,
the unmoving is realized.445 In commentary on this, Nāropa says:
“Mahāmudrā consort” is a form arising from space. The “desire” is one’s own meditation, from which the “unmoving” is born. This refers to the halting of the emission from the vajra jewel. This is the body innate joy, speech innate joy, and mind innate joy.446
These passages clearly teach that with oneself in the form of Kālacakra mother and father, one develops desire for union and generates the unchanging bliss.
This is the way the mahāmudrā consort generates unchanging bliss. The practitioner of low intelligence meditates in this way but is unable to generate unchanging bliss by relying on a mahāmudrā consort from the very beginning, so as a method of developing unchanging bliss, he first relies upon an activity mudrā consort to bring the bodhicitta down to the tip of the vajra jewel. Thereafter this drop is prevented from changing or moving elsewhere by the power of the mahāmudrā consort, from which arises one instance of unchanging bliss. This is the first of the 21,600 instances of unchanging bliss.
After this he develops the second and following instances of unchanging bliss by relying on the mahāmudrā consort.
In this connection, immediately after quoting the tantra verses beginning “A mere apparition of the mind” as a source for mahāmudrā consort meditation,  the Supreme and Unchanging summary says:
These are the definitive words of the Buddha. The yogi abandons the changing bliss that arises from the union of the two external organs, meditates on the mahāmudrā consort, this mere apparition of mind, until the finality of enlightenment.447 Therefore, up to and including the branch of recollection, any or all of the three types of practitioners will generate bliss by the union of the two organs. The practitioner of low intelligence will especially rely on an activity mudrā consort and develop changing bliss through the union of the two organs. However later he will be able to generate unchanging bliss by relying on a mahāmudrā consort, and from that point onward the yogi “abandons the changing bliss that arises from the union of the two external organs and meditates upon the mahāmudrā consort, this mere apparition of mind, until the finality of enlightenment.” In the phrase “mere apparition of mind,” the word “mere” does not negate the reality of the mahāmudrā consort, but negates atom-created materiality, as in the case of external form.
The practitioner of middling intelligence generates unchanging bliss through reliance on a wisdom consort, and apart from the difference in consort, his practice is similar to the above. The practices of relying upon these two types of consorts have been explained in the section on recollection.
The practitioner of high intelligence, from the moment he develops the ability to produce unchanging bliss, relies solely on the mahāmudrā consort to generate unchanging bliss. In the form of Kālacakra mother and father, he focuses single-pointedly on union and meditates on desire.
This causes the caṇḍālī fire to blaze, and one red speck travels to the crown of his coarse body. When it is stabilized, the white bodhicitta melts and descends through the central channel to the tip of the vajra jewel, where it is held firm by the power of the mahāmudrā consort. From this, one instance of unchanging bliss arises, and this bliss, indivisible from oneself in the form of empty-form Kālacakra mother and father,  directly cognizes nonaspected emptiness like water being poured into water. This is the first of the 21,600 instances of bliss, the attainment of the path of seeing — wherein emptiness is newly seen with direct perception — and the attainment of the first level, great joy. Using the above process as an illustration, the 21,600 white drops are then stacked up in succession inside the central channel from the tip of the vajra jewel to the center of the crown cakra. Similarly 21,600 red specks are stacked from the crown to the tip of the vajra jewel, and 21,600 instances of unchanging bliss, developed in dependence on the drops and arranged in groups of 1,800, will form the twelve levels.
The way that the twelve levels of the Kālacakra tradition are presented as the ten levels of the ārya paths of practice and the reasons for that have already been explained.
From the tip of the vajra jewel to the center of the secret-area cakra, 3,600 white drops are stacked inside the central channel. The lower 1,800 drops give rise to 1,800 instances of unchanging bliss. This is the first level. The 1,800 instances of unchanging bliss that arise in dependence on the upper 1,800 drops make up the second level.
Likewise the levels from the secret area to the navel and other cakras can be known from the previous section on divisions by numbers. On the creation of instances of bliss from the drops stacked one after another from the tip of the vajra jewel to the crown, the Great Commentary on the seventy-fifth verse of the Gnosis chapter says:
Whatever  there are of bodhicitta travel from the forehead to the throat, heart, navel, and secret place. They are stopped by the power of prāṇāyāma.
At the secret place the body drop is halted. Likewise the speech, mind, and gnosis drops are halted at the navel, heart, and throat. “Of these drops, the moving fluid” means that the fluid, which is liquid by nature and different from the body drop at the secret place, which is naturally thick, is spoken of as “moving fluid.” This is stopped at the “tip of the victory banner of the vajra jewel,” meaning at the opening of the organ.
This moving fluid is “wisdom gnosis, if bliss is granted by the cause of the unmoving succession of drops.” At this time this is not the gnosis of the activity mudrā consort but the accomplishment of wisdom gnosis.
Because it is immobile, “the instances of unmoving bliss are dharmadhātu here” and granted by Prajñāpāramitā. Therefore the bliss of the mahāmudrā is supreme and unchanging.448 The meaning of this passage is as follows.
The drops, indicated by the word “whatever,” reach down from the forehead to the secret area. Those that are coagulated drops are stopped from falling by the power of prāṇāyāma. They are the body, speech, mind, and gnosis drops and are stopped at the secret area, navel, heart, and throat respectively. The molten fluid, which is different from the solid body drop at the secret area, is halted at the opening of the organ at the tip of the vajra jewel.
By what is it blocked? By the mahāmudrā consort. Therefore this molten fluid, which is given the name “moving fluid,” is halted and made immobile by the mahāmudrā consort. If instances of unchanging bliss are granted with the succession of stacked drops prevented from moving elsewhere as a cause, then at that time this bliss is the bliss of wisdom gnosis and becomes the fourth initiation.
It is “not the gnosis of the activity mudrā consort.” Because the succession of drops does not move to other places, the instances of unmoving or unchanging bliss are here called dharmadhātu.
From what cause are they produced? They are granted or produced by the mahāmudrā consort Prajñāpāramitā. This is the meaning of the above passage.
Similarly the specks or red bodhicitta constituents are stabilized from the crown to the tip of the vajra jewel.
The Later Kālacakra Tantra says:
From fluid rising up, specks traveling down, the indestructible melody of Brahmā,
from which, stains upon the vajras of body, speech, and mind are destroyed, to become an enlightened buddha.449
The root tantra A Short Teaching on Initiations also says: When living beings die, moon nectar falls,
sun specks of Rāhu move up,
and consciousness is of samsara.
Greater than that, moon nectar moves up,
Sun specks of Rāhu move down,
and consciousness is of unchanging bliss.450
These verses are saying that the white bodhicitta constituent is stacked up from the tip of the vajra jewel to the crown, and the red speck constituent is stacked downward from the crown to the tip of the vajra jewel. From this the mind turns into the 21,600 instances of bliss and finally into the nonabiding nirvana. To summarize, the 21,600 drops of the white constituent are stabilized within the central channel from the tip of the vajra jewel up to the center of the crown cakra. One instance of unchanging bliss is generated in dependence upon each drop, and by 21,600 instances of unchanging bliss joining with emptiness, the resulting gnosis of bliss and emptiness destroys the clinging to true existence and its imprints as well as the imprints of falling bliss.
Also, by stopping the 21,600 breaths, the winds of the twelve wind movements are halted.
Each instance of bliss is divided into a path of noninterruption and a path of freedom. Each instance of bliss as the direct cognition of emptiness on the path of noninterruption is the antidote to clinging to true existence and its imprints. Each instance of bliss in its aspect of unchanging bliss is the antidote to falling bliss and its imprints. The paths of freedom are the states of actual abandonment accomplished by the noninterrupted paths, and they are also accompanied by instances of bliss and so number 21,600. The way the instances of unchanging bliss halt the wind movements is as follows.
Each wind movement consists of approximately 1,800 breaths, and each creation of unchanging bliss halts one breath.
In this way, with the completion of 1,800 instances of unchanging bliss, one complete wind movement has been halted. Applying this process to the other wind movements, each level has 1,800 instances of unchanging bliss, and so with the completion of each level, one wind movement is halted. Finally 21,600 instances of unchanging bliss are generated,  the twelve levels are accomplished, clinging to true existence and falling bliss, along with their imprints, are destroyed.
The twelve wind movements are halted, and the twelve aspects of truth and the sixteen realities are achieved.451 On this the tantra says:
Meditate on the supreme and unchanging.
With vajra placed inside lotus,
bring the winds into the drops,
the drops into the cakras;
the movement of drops halted at the vajra,
always rigid, the yogi continuously raises fluid.
With the yoga of mahāmudrā,
the descent to the vajra, and by its blessing,
the instances of supreme unchanging,
completed at 21,600,
will bring the great enlightenment,
the attainment of Vajrasattva.452
The necessity for the practitioner of high intelligence to abandon activity and wisdom mudrā consorts and to rely solely on a mahāmudrā consort once he has developed the ability to generate unchanging bliss, and for practitioners of middling and low intelligence to do the same once they have developed the ability to induce unchanging bliss solely in reliance upon the mahāmudrā consort, is taught in verse 199 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter:
Mind abandons impure activity mudrā consorts and mentally conceived wisdom mudrā consorts.
For the attainment of perfect enlightenment, the she-creator of supreme buddha, supreme, unsullied mudrā consort, unchanging in aspect,
all-pervading, dispelling darkness vast as space, the path traveled by yogis, forever unchanging,
the radiance of gnosis destroying the impurities of existence, meditate upon this wisdom of Kālacakra.453
The verse beginning “Mudrā, like an illusion”454 quoted in the Supreme and Unchanging summary is prefaced by the words “The characteristics of the mahāmudrā consort are spoken of.” Also the Root Tantra, quoted in the same summary, says:
Abandoning activity mudrā consorts
and conceived wisdom mudrā consorts, meditate upon the mahāmudrā
with the yoga of the supreme and unchanging.455
Valid cognition The Vajragarbha Commentary says:
Apparitions are seen by a nonconceptual mind.
A nonconceptualizing and nonmistaken cognition is said to be a direct cognition.
This is of four kinds:
direct sensory cognition, direct mental cognition, direct yogic cognition, and direct self-knowing cognition.
These reveal, engage, attain, and experience.456
As this quote makes clear, the way that the six-branched yogas are determined as being direct cognitions is from the point of view of the cognition being nonmistaken and nonconceptual regarding the empty forms. These empty-form apparitions are clear unobstructed appearances, and the cognition therefore is nonconceptual.
The cognition is unmistaken and undeceived as regards the appearance of these empty forms and is therefore a valid cognition.
It has already been explained what type of valid cognition the first five branches are.
This sixth branch can be classified as yogic valid cognition directly perceiving emptiness.
However, because it is a nonconceptual, nonmistaken consciousness experiencing supreme and unchanging bliss, Butön Rinpoché has called it a direct self-knowing cognition.457 Gyaltsap Rinpoché also asserts it to be a direct self-knowing cognition.458
Purification divisions The form aggregate group of six phenomena is purified by this branch. Purification can be divided into the ten types because of the cessation of the five mandala winds of the right and five mandala winds of the left.
The Great Commentary on verse 115 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter states:
“The glorious meditative concentration is the wheel carrier.” This refers to Vairocana. Meditative concentration is of ten kinds because of the cessation of the ten winds.459 On the immediate results the Great Commentary, on verse 119 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter, says:
“Then the purification accomplished by meditative concentration”: this refers to the apprehending consciousness and objects apprehended becoming as one. The unchanging bliss it produces is spoken of as meditative concentration.
Therefore the purification accomplished by meditative concentration is that “in a few days,” referring to the days of three years and three fortnights,460 the “gnosis form will be accomplished.” This refers to enlightenment with its attainment of the ten powers and so forth.461
Concerning the ultimate results, the aggregate of form, the earth element, the organ of the body, the sensory source of smell, the anus, and the action of speaking are the six phenomena transformed into nonobscuration to become Vairocana and so forth.
Know how the lotus of the empty-form mudrā consort
in recollection yoga induces great unchanging bliss.462 Therefore, with an extensive explanation of these vajra words, the branches of recollection and meditative concentration, and the completion stage itself, have been explained. The Fruits of the Two Stages This has two outlines: 1.The immediate results of the generation stage and completion stage
2.Ultimate results The immediate results of the generation stage and completion stage This is under two headings:
1.The immediate results of the generation stage
2.The immediate results of the completion stage The immediate results of the generation stage
Bright Lamp says:
Activity rituals, pacification and so forth,
likewise the eight siddhis.463 The immediate results of the generation stage are the lower siddhis such as pacification and increase, which are achieved by the twelve or eight great activities, as well as the eight middling siddhis. A more extensive explanation can be known from the tantra and commentary. The immediate results of the completion stage These can be known from the sections on each of the branches.
Ultimate results
The ultimate result of the generation and completion stages is the attainment of full and perfect enlightenment:
Activity rituals, pacification and so forth, likewise the eight siddhis; enlightenment also, the supreme.464
The generation and completion stages produce lower, middling, and supreme results. The lower results are the siddhis of pacification, increase, and so forth, and the middling results are the eight siddhis. These are not the only results, because “enlightenment also” is the supreme result of the two stages.
The generation stage, as previously explained,  is completed when the mindstream has been ripened for the actual development of the special completion stage, whose branches from withdrawal to meditative concentration are practiced as has been described. From this arises “full and perfect enlightenment by single instances.” This means that after the completion of 21,600 instances of supreme and unchanging bliss comes the initial accomplishment of enlightenment.
Then comes the yoga of the great bliss of complete enlightenment, where all instances are without differences of quality, whether one or many, the supreme nonduality of method and wisdom.
This is spoken of in the fifth summary of the Realms chapter:
Here the meditator meditating upon all the instances attains “full and perfect enlightenment by single instances.” This means that the practitioner meditating upon the 21,600 instances of supreme unchanging bliss firstly attains full and perfect enlightenment by instances of supreme unchanging bliss. After that comes the yoga of complete enlightenment, the supreme nonduality, where all instances are without difference, whether one or many.465
Furthermore verse 162 of the Gnosis chapter says:
The flow of the moon and sun is weakened, the great winds of the two paths also are halted,
the lotus awakens the vajra, the moon melts and engages with the great form of the sun.
Phenomena and nonphenomena become one, the indestructible is seen in the three-existence forms.
At that time, as he moves to the supreme level, there is not the slightest nonduality for such a yogi. The wrathful, the buddhas, goddesses, Rasavajrā, Kṣitigarbha, and so forth,
manifest in space minds of great joy to the yogi at this time of accomplishment.
On a solar day of the moon, at dawn and midnight, the desired siddhi of the yogi arises.
Because of the moment, rains of jewels or flowers fall to earth.466 To explain these verses a little:
the flow of the left and right moon and sun winds is weakened,  and in the pathways of the left and right channels the “great wind,” or karmic winds, are completely halted.
The lotus of the consort awakens and stiffens the vajra of the yogi, causing the moon drops to melt from the forehead and to stabilize from the tip of the vajra jewel to the crown. This “engages with the great form of the sun,” which refers to the sun specks of red bodhicitta stabilized from the crown down to the vajra jewel. Because of this, “phenomena,” referring to method or unchanging bliss, and “nonphenomena,” referring to wisdom or the empty-form mahāmudrā consort, become indivisibly one. All indestructible sounds abiding in the hearts of all beings living in the “three-existence forms,” or three realms, are well perceived and seen. At that time for such a yogi there is not the slightest separation between method and wisdom as he moves to the supreme level of ultimate union.
Having arrived at this ultimate level, the yogi possesses minds of supreme and ultimate joy. At this time of accomplishment, the thirty-six phenomena associated with his being, consisting of the aggregates, elements, and so forth, are all freed of obscuration.
Wrathful deities such as Yamāntaka, buddhas such as Vajrasattva, goddesses such as Viśvamātā, female vajra bodhisattvas such as Rasavajrā, and male bodhisattvas such as Kṣitigarbha all manifest in space.
This desired siddhi of the yogi, the ultimate level of union, is realized on a “solar day of the moon,” meaning on a particular solar day at midnight or at dawn.
Due to the power of this moment of supreme and complete enlightenment, a rain of jewels or a rain of flowers falls to earth.
The status of the body, speech, and mind of the yogi who has realized this highest enlightenment is taught in the next verses:
The body is of clarity, devoid of atoms, like the sky, well completed by the signs and so forth.
The three worlds are clear, free of obscuration, and like appearances in a dream.
Speech is completely unbroken, in languages of many, entering the hearts of others.
Mind is full of the highest bliss, unmoving, at all times embraced by the innate.467
These verses will be explained a little.
For the yogi who has achieved the ultimate union, the coarse body composed of atoms has gone.
The empty-form Kālacakra in mother-father aspect is of total clarity, devoid of obscuration and obstruction, and is therefore like the sky.
It is a body perfected by the thirty-two signs of an enlightened being and by the eighty marks, referred to by the words “and so forth.” To the mind of the yogi the three worlds are as clear as crystal, free of obscuration.
They are dreamlike appearances, untainted by the contamination of the two types of obscurations.
The speech of the yogi is “completely unbroken,” meaning that its continuum is never severed.
“In the languages of many,” meaning in languages that accord with those of countless living beings, it enters accordingly “the hearts,” or minds, of countless other living beings.
The mind of the yogi is filled with the highest and supreme bliss one-pointedly focused upon emptiness. It never moves from its meditation for an instant and at all times is embraced by the innate clear-light mind. These verses teach the four bodies and the four vajras of body, speech, mind, and gnosis.
The body, speech, and mind vajras are clearly taught.
The gnosis vajra is indicated by the line “Mind is full of the highest bliss” because the ultimate bliss is established as being the gnosis vajra.
Concerning the four bodies, the two lines beginning “The body is of clarity” directly teach the saṃbhogakāya enjoyment body adorned with the signs and marks and implies the nirmāṇakāya basic emanation body with its countless emanations.
The empty form adorned with signs and marks that is first actualized at the end of the last instance of unchanging bliss is the saṃbhogakāya, whereas the manifestation of empty forms or “manifold saṃbhogakāya forms” adorned with the signs and marks and directly produced by that saṃbhogakāya to pervade the three realms is the basic nirmāṇakāya.
Both these are directly taught by the lines beginning “The body is of clarity.” These empty-form “manifold saṃbhogakāya forms” pervading the three realms are clearly taught in the Great Commentary.
On verse 232 of the Methods of Accomplishment chapter it says: With the application of direct cognition “manifold saṃbhogakāya forms like stars in the sky,” meaning like a host of stars, are seen with the fleshly eye and so forth in the three worlds and the three times like dreams and illusions.468 But isn’t this how empty forms are seen during withdrawal and the other branches?
The Great Commentary continues:
With the attainment of full and perfect enlightened mind, they are seen by the gnosis eye.469 This teaches that at the time of enlightenment, these forms are seen by the gnosis eye. Therefore the forms are actual buddha forms adorned with the signs and marks and appearing like a host of stars.
But in this tradition doesn’t the saṃbhogakāya enjoyment body refer to the indestructible speech of the buddha?
How can there be a saṃbhogakāya adorned with the signs and marks? It is true that the speech of the buddha is known as the saṃbhogakāya, but the tantra also talks of a saṃbhogakāya adorned with the signs and marks.
In the third summary of the Realms chapter it says: These two, the buddha and the bodhisattva, are related as teacher and requestor by way of nirmāṇakāyas or saṃbhogakāyas.
The former and the latter are not contradictory.470
He displayed the mandalas and magical creations, then entered the saṃbhogakāya, source of the nirmāṇakāya.471
This teaches that Sucandra withdrew his emanations and entered his own saṃbhogakāya. The nirmāṇakāya implied by the saṃbhogakāya enjoyment body is spoken of in the third summary of the Realms chapter as being of countless manifestations:
By the force of previous prayers and with all wisdom and merit accumulations complete, glorious qualities such as fearlessness all perfected, the conquering Buddha in countless emanated illusory and nonobscured forms in the great thousand world realms employs the languages of every living being when various requestors request the Buddha in the limitless tongues of limitless living beings. With omniscient speech he teaches worldly and nonworldly dharma. Yet the Omniscient One is not more than one.
For example, someone with great powers of illusion will manifest many forms, and with the forms he has created he will uproot trees and shake mountaintops. In the guises of Mahādeva and Viṣṇu, he will bind Devadatta and others. Yet this great illusionist is not more than one person. In this way, the illusory emanations of buddhas and bodhisattvas work for living beings.472
As this passage indicates, by the power of prayers and the completion of the two accumulations, the conquering buddhas do not move even for an instant from the nonconceptual state of unchanging bliss and emptiness united as one taste. At the same time the three realms appear to them as a dream, without obscuration, and as clear as images in a prognostic mirror. By knowing how the three realms appear in impure aspect to the minds of others, they see the complete extent of existent conventional phenomena as clearly as a berry in the palm of the hand. From this omniscience there emerges limitless emanated forms, each of which employs speech that accords with languages of limitless living beings and teaches a dharma that is disposed to the minds of each these beings. In this way the buddhas work solely for the benefit of living beings for as long as space lasts. The line from the above verses that begins “Speech is completely unbroken” teaches that the continuum of speech of the Buddha is at no time severed and “in languages of many,” meaning in accord with each of the differing languages of limitless living beings, it “enters the hearts of others,” meaning that it satisfies the minds of those living beings.
This teaches the saṃbhogakāya as the speech of a buddha. The “mind” in the third line, “Mind is full of the highest bliss,” is one of unchanging bliss dwelling indivisibly in emptiness. This line, therefore, teaches the svabhāvikakāya nature body, or great bliss body. “Unmoving, at all times embraced by the innate” teaches the innate clear-light mind dwelling indivisibly with emptiness and therefore teaches the dharmakāya.
The ultimate unchanging bliss merged inseparably with emptiness, as signified by the letter vaṃ, indivisible from form endowed with supreme characteristics, as signified by the letter e, represents the ultimate result.
Furthermore the thirty-six phenomena of the aggregates and so forth, free of obscuration, and arranged in five categories are signified by the five parts of the letter vaṃ.
The thirty-six phenomena of the elements and so forth, free from obscuration and arranged in six categories, are signified by the six parts of the letter e.
These indivisible method and wisdom phenomena are phenomena of the final result. This has been a brief presentation of the resultant state.
A more extensive description can be known from the Great Commentary and the tantra. The precious lotus garden of the inner, outer, and other, adorned with stamen garlands of two stages and results, radiates light of millions of illuminating scripture and reasoning. May this mighty sun of excellent explanation shine here now. Whatever virtue is to be gained from these efforts to explain the path of indivisibility
of great bliss with form supremely endowed,
supreme essence of the ocean of tantra and commentary,
is dedicated for every living being to attain the highest enlightenment. For me too, when appearances of this life fade, may I be reborn in the greatest place of practice,
the land known as Shambhala,
there to be taught unerringly the path
by the Kalkī king Mahipala.473 There in a three-dimensional mandala of the complete body, speech, and mind,
adorned with many precious jewels, may I receive complete and supreme initiation and hold vows and pledges as I would hold my life. With mind ripened by initiation, a vessel fit for the two stages, then by the practice of the greatest of all paths, the stages of completion and generation, the four levels of approximation and accomplishment, by the path of 21,600 instances of unchanging bliss, may I attain the four bodies. The ocean of this tantra and commentary
	is of a depth difficult to fathom, and I am of little intelligence and lacking in effort. Therefore all mistakes I have made I confess to the gurus, deities, and ḍākinīs, and ask that you correct them. Willingly acceding to the request of Dorjé Tseten, official of the great dharma king,474 cherisher of the precious doctrine, this work entitled Ornament of Stainless Light:

